Executive Order 13198 of January 29, 2001
Agency Responsibilities With Respect to Faith-Based and Community Initiatives
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to help the Federal Government coordinate a national effort to expand opportunities for faith-based and other community organizations and to strengthen their capacity to better meet social needs in America's communities, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment of Executive Department Centers for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives. (a) The Attorney General, the Secretary of Education, the Secretary of Labor, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, and the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall each establish within their respective departments a Center for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives (Center).
(b) Each executive department Center shall be supervised by a Director, appointed by the department head in consultation with the White House Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives (White House OFBCI).
(c) Each department shall provide its Center with appropriate staff, administrative support, and other resources to meet its responsibilities under this order.
(d) Each department's Center shall begin operations no later than 45 days from the date of this order.
Sec. 2.
Purpose of Executive Department Centers for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives. The purpose of the executive department Centers will be to coordinate department efforts to eliminate regulatory, contracting, and other programmatic obstacles to the participation of faith-based and other community organizations in the provision of social services.
Sec. 3.
Responsibilities of Executive Department Centers for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives. Each Center shall, to the extent permitted by law: (a) conduct, in coordination with the White House OFBCI, a department-wide audit to identify all existing barriers to the participation of faith-based and other community organizations in the delivery of social services by the department, including but not limited to regulations, rules, orders, procurement, and other internal policies and practices, and outreach activities that either facially discriminate against or otherwise discourage or disadvantage the participation of faith-based and other community organizations in Federal programs;
(b) coordinate a comprehensive departmental effort to incorporate faith-based and other community organizations in department programs and initiatives to the greatest extent possible;
(c) propose initiatives to remove barriers identified pursuant to section 3(a) of this order, including but not limited to reform of regulations, procurement, and other internal policies and practices, and outreach activities;
(d) propose the development of innovative pilot and demonstration programs to increase the participation of faith-based and other community organizations in Federal as well as State and local initiatives; and
(e) develop and coordinate department outreach efforts to disseminate information more effectively to faith-based and other community organizations with respect to programming changes, contracting opportunities, and Start Printed Page 8498other department initiatives, including but not limited to Web and Internet resources.
Sec. 4.
Additional Responsibilities of the Department of Health and Human Services and the Department of Labor Centers. In addition to those responsibilities described in section 3 of this order, the Department of Health and Human Services and the Department of Labor Centers shall, to the extent permitted by law: (a) conduct a comprehensive review of policies and practices affecting existing funding streams governed by so-called “Charitable Choice” legislation to assess the department's compliance with the requirements of Charitable Choice; and (b) promote and ensure compliance with existing Charitable Choice legislation by the department, as well as its partners in State and local government, and their contractors.
Sec. 5.
Reporting Requirements. (a) Report. Not later than 180 days after the date of this order and annually thereafter, each of the five executive department Centers described in section 1 of this order shall prepare and submit a report to the White House OFBCI.
(b) Contents. The report shall include a description of the department's efforts in carrying out its responsibilities under this order, including but not limited to:
(1) a comprehensive analysis of the barriers to the full participation of faith-based and other community organizations in the delivery of social services identified pursuant to section 3(a) of this order and the proposed strategies to eliminate those barriers; and
(2) a summary of the technical assistance and other information that will be available to faith-based and other community organizations regarding the program activities of the department and the preparation of applications or proposals for grants, cooperative agreements, contracts, and procurement.
(c) Performance Indicators. The first report, filed 180 days after the date of this order, shall include annual performance indicators and measurable objectives for department action. Each report filed thereafter shall measure the department's performance against the objectives set forth in the initial report.
Sec. 6.
Responsibilities of All Executive Departments and Agencies. All executive departments and agencies (agencies) shall: (a) designate an agency employee to serve as the liaison and point of contact with the White House OFBCI; and
(b) cooperate with the White House OFBCI and provide such information, support, and assistance to the White House OFBCI as it may request, to the extent permitted by law.
Sec. 7.
Administration and Judicial Review. (a) The agencies' actions directed by this Executive Order shall be carried out subject to the availability of appropriations and to the extent permitted by law.
(b) This order does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity against the United States, its agencies or instrumentalities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 8499
Executive Order 13199 of January 29, 2001
Establishment of White House Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives
By the authority vested in me as President of the United States by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to help the Federal Government coordinate a national effort to expand opportunities for faith-based and other community organizations and to strengthen their capacity to better meet social needs in America's communities, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. Faith-based and other community organizations are indispensable in meeting the needs of poor Americans and distressed neighborhoods. Government cannot be replaced by such organizations, but it can and should welcome them as partners. The paramount goal is compassionate results, and private and charitable community groups, including religious ones, should have the fullest opportunity permitted by law to compete on a level playing field, so long as they achieve valid public purposes, such as curbing crime, conquering addiction, strengthening families and neighborhoods, and overcoming poverty. This delivery of social services must be results oriented and should value the bedrock principles of pluralism, nondiscrimination, evenhandedness, and neutrality.
Sec. 2.
Establishment. There is established a White House Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives (White House OFBCI) within the Executive Office of the President that will have lead responsibility in the executive branch to establish policies, priorities, and objectives for the Federal Government's comprehensive effort to enlist, equip, enable, empower, and expand the work of faith-based and other community organizations to the extent permitted by law.
Sec. 3.
Functions. The principal functions of the White House OFBCI are, to the extent permitted by law: (a) to develop, lead, and coordinate the Administration's policy agenda affecting faith-based and other community programs and initiatives, expand the role of such efforts in communities, and increase their capacity through executive action, legislation, Federal and private funding, and regulatory relief;
(b) to ensure that Administration and Federal Government policy decisions and programs are consistent with the President's stated goals with respect to faith-based and other community initiatives;
(c) to help integrate the President's policy agenda affecting faith-based and other community organizations across the Federal Government;
(d) to coordinate public education activities designed to mobilize public support for faith-based and community nonprofit initiatives through volunteerism, special projects, demonstration pilots, and public-private partnerships;
(e) to encourage private charitable giving to support faith-based and community initiatives;
(f) to bring concerns, ideas, and policy options to the President for assisting, strengthening, and replicating successful faith-based and other community programs;
(g) to provide policy and legal education to State, local, and community policymakers and public officials seeking ways to empower faith-based and Start Printed Page 8500other community organizations and to improve the opportunities, capacity, and expertise of such groups;
(h) to develop and implement strategic initiatives under the President's agenda to strengthen the institutions of civil society and America's families and communities;
(i) to showcase and herald innovative grassroots nonprofit organizations and civic initiatives;
(j) to eliminate unnecessary legislative, regulatory, and other bureaucratic barriers that impede effective faith-based and other community efforts to solve social problems;
(k) to monitor implementation of the President's agenda affecting faith-based and other community organizations; and
(l) to ensure that the efforts of faith-based and other community organizations meet high standards of excellence and accountability.
Sec. 4.
Administration. (a) The White House OFBCI may function through established or ad hoc committees, task forces, or interagency groups.
(b) The White House OFBCI shall have a staff to be headed by the Assistant to the President for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives. The White House OFBCI shall have such staff and other assistance, to the extent permitted by law, as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this order. The White House OFBCI operations shall begin no later than 30 days from the date of this order.
(c) The White House OFBCI shall coordinate with the liaison and point of contact designated by each executive department and agency with respect to this initiative.
(d) All executive departments and agencies (agencies) shall cooperate with the White House OFBCI and provide such information, support, and assistance to the White House OFBCI as it may request, to the extent permitted by law.
(e) The agencies' actions directed by this Executive Order shall be carried out subject to the availability of appropriations and to the extent permitted by law.
Sec. 5.
Judicial Review. This order does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity by a party against the United States, its agencies or instrumentalities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13200 of February 11, 2001
President's Information Technology Advisory Committee, Further Amendment to Executive Order 13035, as Amended
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the High-Performance Computing Act of 1991 (Public Law 102-194), as amended by the Next Generation Internet Research Act of 1998 (Public Law 105-305), and in order to extend the life of the President's Information Technology Advisory Committee so that it may continue to carry out its responsibilities, it is hereby ordered that Executive Order 13035 of February 11, 1997, as amended by Executive Orders 13092 and 13113 (“Executive Order 13035, as amended”), is further amended as follows:
Section 4(b) of Executive Order 13035, as amended, is further amended by deleting “February 11, 2001 and inserting “June 1, 2001,” in lieu thereof.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13201 of February 17, 2001
Notification of Employee Rights Concerning Payment of Union Dues or Fees
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act, 40 U.S.C. 471 et seq., and in order to ensure the economical and efficient administration and completion of Government contracts, it is hereby ordered that:
Section 1. (a) This order is designed to promote economy and efficiency in Government procurement. When workers are better informed of their rights, including their rights under the Federal labor laws, their productivity is enhanced. The availability of such a workforce from which the United States may draw facilitates the efficient and economical completion of its procurement contracts.
(b) The Secretary of Labor (Secretary) shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this order. The Secretary shall adopt such rules and regulations and issue such orders as are deemed necessary and appropriate to achieve the purposes of this order.
Sec. 2. (a) Except in contracts exempted in accordance with section 3 of this order, all Government contracting departments and agencies shall, to the extent consistent with law, include the following provisions in every Government contract, other than collective bargaining agreements as defined in 5 U.S.C. 7103(a)(8) and purchases under the “Simplified Acquisition Threshold” as defined in the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 U.S.C. 403).
“1. During the term of this contract, the contractor agrees to post a notice, of such size and in such form as the Secretary of Labor shall prescribe, in conspicuous places in and about its plants and offices, including all places where notices to employees are customarily posted. The notice shall include the following information (except that the last sentence shall not be included in notices posted in the plants or offices of carriers subject to the Railway Labor Act, as amended (45 U.S.C. 151-188)):
“NOTICE TO EMPLOYEES
Under Federal law, employees cannot be required to join a union or maintain membership in a union in order to retain their jobs. Under certain conditions, the law permits a union and an employer to enter into a union-security agreement requiring employees to pay uniform periodic dues and initiation fees. However, employees who are not union members can object to the use of their payments for certain purposes and can only be required to pay their share of union costs relating to collective bargaining, contract administration, and grievance adjustment.
“If you do not want to pay that portion of dues or fees used to support activities not related to collective bargaining, contract administration, or grievance adjustment, you are entitled to an appropriate reduction in your payment. If you believe that you have been required to pay dues or fees used in part to support activities not related to collective bargaining, contract administration, or grievance adjustment, you may be entitled to a refund and to an appropriate reduction in future payments.Start Printed Page 11222
“For further information concerning your rights, you may wish to contact the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) either at one of its Regional offices or at the following address:
National Labor Relations Board
Division of Information
1099 14th Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20570
“To locate the nearest NLRB office, see NLRB's website at www.nlrb.gov.
“2. The contractor will comply with all provisions of Executive Order 13201 of February 17, 2001, and related rules, regulations, and orders of the Secretary of Labor.
“3. In the event that the contractor does not comply with any of the requirements set forth in paragraphs (1) or (2) above, this contract may be cancelled, terminated, or suspended in whole or in part, and the contractor may be declared ineligible for further Government contracts in accordance with procedures authorized in or adopted pursuant to Executive Order 13201 of February 17, 2001. Such other sanctions or remedies may be imposed as are provided in Executive Order 13201 of February 17, 2001, or by rule, regulation, or order of the Secretary of Labor, or as are otherwise provided by law.
“4. The contractor will include the provisions of paragraphs (1) through (3) herein in every subcontract or purchase order entered into in connection with this contract unless exempted by rules, regulations, or orders of the Secretary of Labor issued pursuant to section 3 of Executive Order 13201 of February 17, 2001, so that such provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor or vendor. The contractor will take such action with respect to any such subcontract or purchase order as may be directed by the Secretary of Labor as a means of enforcing such provisions, including the imposition of sanctions for non compliance: Provided, however, that if the contractor becomes involved in litigation with a subcontractor or vendor, or is threatened with such involvement, as a result of such direction, the contractor may request the United States to enter into such litigation to protect the interests of the United States.”
(b) Whenever, through Acts of Congress or through clarification of existing law by the courts or otherwise, it appears that contractual provisions other than, or in addition to, those set out in subsection (a) of this section are needed to inform employees fully and accurately of their rights with respect to union dues, union-security agreements, or the like, the Secretary shall promptly issue such rules, regulations, or orders as are needed to cause the substitution or addition of appropriate contractual provisions in Government contracts thereafter entered into.
Sec. 3. (a) The Secretary may, if the Secretary finds that special circumstances require an exemption in order to serve the national interest, exempt a contracting department or agency from the requirements of any or all of the provisions of section 2 of this order with respect to a particular contract, subcontract, or purchase order.
(b) The Secretary may, by rule, regulation, or order, exempt from the provisions of section 2 of this order certain classes of contracts to the extent that they involve (i) work outside the United States and do not involve the recruitment or employment of workers within the United States; (ii) work in jurisdictions where State law forbids enforcement of union- security agreements; (iii) work at sites where the notice to employees described in section 2(a) of this order would be unnecessary because the employees are not represented by a union; (iv) numbers of workers below appropriate thresholds set by the Secretary; or (v) subcontracts below an appropriate tier set by the Secretary.
(c) The Secretary may provide, by rule, regulation, or order, for the exemption of facilities of a contractor, subcontractor, or vendor that are in all Start Printed Page 11223respects separate and distinct from activities related to the performance of the contract: Provided, that such exemption will not interfere with or impede the effectuation of the purposes of this order: And provided further, that in the absence of such an exemption all facilities shall be covered by the provisions of this order.
Sec. 4. (a) The Secretary may investigate any Government contractor, subcontractor, or vendor to determine whether the contractual provisions required by section 2 of this order have been violated. Such investigations shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the Secretary.
(b) The Secretary shall receive and investigate complaints by employees of a Government contractor, subcontractor, or vendor where such complaints allege a failure to perform or a violation of the contractual provisions required by section 2 of this order.
Sec. 5. (a) The Secretary, or any agency or officer in the executive branch of the Government designated by rule, regulation, or order of the Secretary, may hold such hearings, public or private, regarding compliance with this order as the Secretary may deem advisable.
(b) The Secretary may hold hearings, or cause hearings to be held, in accordance with subsection (a) of this section prior to imposing, ordering, or recommending the imposition of sanctions under this order. Neither an order for debarment of any contractor from further Government contracts under section 6(b) of this order nor the inclusion of a contractor on a published list of noncomplying contractors under section 6(c) of this order shall be carried out without affording the contractor an opportunity for a hearing.
Sec. 6. In accordance with such rules, regulations, or orders as the Secretary may issue or adopt, the Secretary may:
(a) after consulting with the contracting department or agency, direct that department or agency to cancel, terminate, suspend, or cause to be cancelled, terminated, or suspended, any contract, or any portion or portions thereof, for failure of the contractor to comply with the contractual provisions required by section 2 of this order; contracts may be cancelled, terminated, or suspended absolutely, or continuance of contracts may be conditioned upon future compliance: Provided, that before issuing a directive under this subsection, the Secretary shall provide the head of the contracting department or agency an opportunity to offer written objections to the issuance of such a directive, which objections shall include a complete statement of reasons for the objections, among which reasons shall be a finding that completion of the contract is essential to the agency's mission: And provided further, that no directive shall be issued by the Secretary under this subsection so long as the head of the contracting department or agency continues personally to object to the issuance of such directive;
(b) after consulting with each affected contracting department or agency, provide that one or more contracting departments or agencies shall refrain from entering into further contracts, or extensions or other modifications of existing contracts, with any noncomplying contractor, until such contractor has satisfied the Secretary that such con tractor has complied with and will carry out the provisions of this order: Provided, that before issuing a directive under this subsection, the Secretary shall provide the head of each contracting department or agency an opportunity to offer written objections to the issuance of such a directive, which objections shall include a complete statement of reasons for the objections, among which reasons shall be a finding that further contracts or extensions or other modifications of existing contracts with the noncomplying contractor are essential to the agency's mission: And provided further, that no directive shall be issued by the Secretary under this subsection so long as the head of a contracting department or agency continues personally to object to the issuance of such directive; and
(c) publish, or cause to be published, the names of contractors that have, in the judgment of the Secretary, failed to comply with the provisions of this order or of related rules, regulations, and orders of the Secretary.Start Printed Page 11224
Sec. 7. Whenever the Secretary invokes section 6(a) or 6(b) of this order, the contracting department or agency shall report the results of the action it has taken to the Secretary within such time as the Secretary shall specify.
Sec. 8. Each contracting department and agency shall cooperate with the Secretary and provide such information and assistance as the Secretary may require in the performance of the Secretary's functions under this order.
Sec. 9. The Secretary may delegate any function or duty of the Secretary under this order to any officer in the Department of Labor or to any other officer in the executive branch of the Government, with the consent of the head of the department or agency in which that officer serves.
Sec. 10. The Federal Acquisition Regulatory Council (FAR Council) shall take whatever action is required to implement in the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) the provisions of this order and of any related rules, regulations, or orders of the Secretary that were issued to implement this Executive Order. The FAR Council shall amend the FAR to require each solicitation of offers for a contract to include a provision that implements section 2 of this order.
Sec. 11. As it relates to notification of employee rights concerning payment of union dues or fees, Executive Order 12836 of February 1, 1993, which, among other things, revoked Executive Order 12800 of April 13, 1992, is revoked.
Sec. 12. The heads of executive departments and agencies shall revoke expeditiously any orders, rules, regulations, guidelines, or policies implementing or enforcing Executive Order 12836 of February 1, 1993, as it relates to notification of employee rights concerning payment of union dues or fees, to the extent consistent with law.
Sec. 13. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, nor does it, create any right to administrative or judicial review, or any right, whether substantive or procedural, enforceable by any party against the United States, its agencies or instrumentalities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
Sec. 14. The provisions of this order shall apply to contracts resulting from solicitations issued on or after the effective date of this order.
Sec. 15. This order shall become effective 60 days after the date of this order.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 11225
Executive Order 13202 of February 17, 2001
Preservation of Open Competition and Government Neutrality Towards Government Contractors' Labor Relations on
Federal and Federally Funded Construction Projects
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and laws of the United States of America, including the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act, 40 U.S.C. 471 et seq., and in order to (1) promote and ensure open competition on Federal and federally funded or assisted construction projects; (2) maintain Government neutrality towards Government contractors' labor relations on Federal and federally funded or assisted construction projects; (3) reduce construction costs to the Federal Government and to the taxpayers; (4) expand job opportunities, especially for small and disadvantaged businesses; and (5) prevent discrimination against Government contractors or their employees based upon labor affiliation or lack thereof; thereby promoting the economical, nondiscriminatory, and efficient administration and completion of Federal and federally funded or assisted construction projects, it is hereby ordered that:
Section 1. To the extent permitted by law, any executive agency awarding any construction contract after the date of this order, or obligating funds pursuant to such a contract, shall ensure that neither the awarding Government authority nor any construction manager acting on behalf of the Government shall, in its bid specifications, project agreements, or other controlling documents:
(a) Require or prohibit bidders, offerors, contractors, or subcontractors to enter into or adhere to agreements with one or more labor organizations, on the same or other related construction project(s); or
(b) Otherwise discriminate against bidders, offerors, contractors, or subcontractors for becoming or refusing to become or remain signatories or otherwise to adhere to agreements with one or more labor organizations, on the same or other related construction project(s).
(c) Nothing in this section shall prohibit contractors or subcontractors from voluntarily entering into agreements described in subsection (a).
Sec. 2. Contracts awarded before the date of this order, and subcontracts awarded pursuant to such contracts, whenever awarded, shall not be governed by this order.
Sec. 3. To the extent permitted by law, any executive agency issuing grants, providing financial assistance, or entering into cooperative agreements for construction projects, shall ensure that neither the bid specifications, project agreements, nor other controlling documents for construction contracts awarded after the date of this order by recipients of grants or financial assistance or by parties to cooperative agreements, nor those of any construction manager acting on their behalf, shall contain any of the requirements or prohibitions set forth in section 1(a) or (b) of this order.
Sec. 4. In the event that an awarding authority, a recipient of grants or financial assistance, a party to a cooperative agreement, or a construction manager acting on behalf of the foregoing, performs in a manner contrary to the provisions of sections 1 or 3 of this order, the executive agency awarding the contract, grant, or assistance shall take such action, consistent with law and regulation, as the agency determines may be appropriate.Start Printed Page 11226
Sec. 5. (a) The head of an executive agency may exempt a particular project, contract, subcontract, grant, or cooperative agreement from the requirements of any or all of the provisions of sections 1 and 3 of this order, if the agency head finds that special circumstances require an exemption in order to avert an imminent threat to public health or safety or to serve the national security.
(b) A finding of “special circumstances” under section 5(a) may not be based on the possibility or presence of a labor dispute concerning the use of contractors or subcontractors who are nonsignatories to, or otherwise do not adhere to, agreements with one or more labor organizations, or concerning employees on the project who are not members of or affiliated with a labor organization.
Sec. 6. (a) The term “construction contract” as used in this order means any contract for the construction, rehabilitation, alteration, conversion, extension, or repair of buildings, highways, or other improvements to real property.
(b) The term “executive agency” as used in this order shall have the same meaning it has in 5 U.S.C. 105, excluding the General Accounting Office.
(c) The term “labor organization” as used in this order shall have the same meaning it has in 42 U.S.C. 2000e(d).
Sec. 7. With respect to Federal contracts, within 60 days of the issuance of this order, the Federal Acquisition Regulatory Council shall take whatever action is required to amend the Federal Acquisition Regulation in order to implement the provisions of this order.
Sec. 8. As it relates to project agreements, Executive Order 12836 of February 1, 1993, which, among other things, revoked Executive Order 12818 of October 23, 1992, is revoked.
Sec. 9. The Presidential Memorandum of June 5, 1997, entitled “Use of Project Labor Agreements for Federal Construction Projects” (the “Memorandum”), is also revoked.
Sec. 10. The heads of executive departments and agencies shall revoke expeditiously any orders, rules, regulations, guidelines, or policies implementing or enforcing the Memorandum or Executive Order 12836 of February 1, 1993, as it relates to project agreements, to the extent consistent with law.
Sec. 11. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, nor does it, create any right to administrative or judicial review, or any right, whether substantive or procedural, enforce able by any party against the United States, its agencies or instrumentalities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 11227
Executive Order 13203 of February 17, 2001
Revocation of Executive Order and Presidential
Memorandum Concerning Labor-Management Partnerships
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered that:
Section 1. Executive Order 12871 of October 1, 1993, as amended by Executive Orders 12983 and 13156, which established the National Partnership Council and requires Federal agencies to form labor-management partnerships for management purposes, is revoked. Among other things, therefore, the National Partnership Council is immediately dissolved.
Sec. 2. The Presidential Memorandum of October 28, 1999, entitled “Reaffirmation of Executive Order 12871—Labor-Management Partnerships” (the “Memorandum”), which reaffirms and expands upon the requirements of Executive Order 12871 of October 1, 1993, is also revoked.
Sec. 3. The Director of the Office of Personnel Management and heads of executive agencies shall promptly move to rescind any orders, rules, regulations, guidelines, or policies implementing or enforcing Executive Order 12871 of October 1, 1993, or the Memorandum, to the extent consistent with law.
Sec. 4. Nothing in this order shall abrogate any collective bargaining agreements in effect on the date of this order.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 11228
Executive Order 13204 of February 17, 2001
Revocation of Executive Order on Nondisplacement of
Qualified Workers Under Certain Contracts
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered that:
Section 1. Executive Order 12933 of October 20, 1994, which requires, with respect to contracts for public buildings, that successive contractors offer a right of first refusal of employment to employees of the prior contractor, is revoked.
Sec. 2. The Secretary of Labor (Secretary), the Federal Acquisition Regulatory Council, and heads of executive agencies shall promptly move to rescind any orders, rules, regulations, guidelines, or policies implementing or enforcing Executive Order 12933 of October 20, 1994, to the extent consistent with law.
Sec. 3. The Secretary shall terminate, effective today, any investigations or other compliance actions based on Executive Order 12933 of October 20, 1994.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13205 of March 9, 2001
Establishing an Emergency Board To Investigate a Dispute Between Northwest Airlines, Inc., and Its Employees Represented by the Aircraft Mechanics Fraternal Association
A dispute exists between Northwest Airlines, Inc., and its employees represented by the Aircraft Mechanics Fraternal Association.
The dispute has not heretofore been adjusted under the provisions of the Railway Labor Act, as amended (45 U.S.C. 151-188) (the “Act”).
In the judgment of the National Mediation Board, this dispute threatens substantially to interrupt interstate commerce to a degree that would deprive sections of the country of essential transportation service.
NOW, THEREFORE, by the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, including sections 10 and 201 of the Act (45 U.S.C. 160 and 181), it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment of Emergency Board (“Board”). There is established, effective March 12, 2001, a Board of three members to be appointed by the President to investigate this dispute. No member shall be pecuniarily or otherwise interested in any organization of airline employees or any air carrier. The Board shall perform its functions subject to the availability of funds.
Sec. 2.
Report. The Board shall report to the President with respect to this dispute within 30 days of its creation.
Sec. 3.
Maintaining Conditions. As provided by section 10 of the Act, from the date of the creation of the Board and for 30 days after the Board has submitted its report to the President, no change in the conditions out of which the dispute arose shall be made by the parties to the controversy, except by agreement of the parties.
Sec. 4.
Record Maintenance. The records and files of the Board are records of the Office of the President and upon the Board's termination shall be maintained in the physical custody of the National Mediation Board.Start Printed Page 15012
Sec. 5.
Expiration. The Board shall terminate upon the submission of the report provided for in sections 2 and 3 of this order.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 18397
Executive Order 13206 of April 4, 2001
Termination of Emergency Authority for Certain       Export Controls
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.), the Export Administration Act of 1979, as amended (50 U.S.C. App. 2401 et seq.) (the “Act”), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. In view of the reauthorization and extension of the Act by Public Law 106-508, Executive Order 12924 of August 19, 1994, which continued the effect of export control regulations under IEEPA, is revoked, and the declaration of economic emergency is rescinded, as provided in this order.
Sec. 2. The revocation of Executive Order 12924 shall not affect any violation of any rules, regulations, orders, licenses, or other forms of administrative action under that order that occurred during the period the order was in effect. All rules and regulations issued or continued in effect under the authority of IEEPA and Executive Order 12924, including those codified at 15 C.F.R. 730-74 (2000), and all orders, regulations, licenses, and other forms of administrative action issued, taken, or continued in effect pursuant thereto, remain in full force and effect, as if issued, taken, or continued in effect pursuant to and as authorized by the Act or by other appropriate authority until amended or revoked by the proper authority. Nothing in this order shall affect the continued applicability of the provision for the administration of the Act and delegations of authority set forth in Executive Order 12002 of July 7, 1977, Executive Order 12214 of May 2, 1980, Executive Order 12938 of November 14, 1994, as amended, Executive Order 12981 of December 5, 1995, as amended, and Executive Order 13026 of November 15, 1996.Start Printed Page 18398
Sec. 3. All rules, regulations, orders, licenses, and other forms of administrative action issued, taken, or continued in effect pursuant to the authority of IEEPA and Executive Order 12924 relating to the administration of section 38(e) of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2778(e)) shall remain in full force and effect until amended or revoked under proper authority.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 18399
Executive Order 13207 of April 5, 2001
Further Amendment to Executive Order 10000, Regulations Governing Additional Compensation and Credit Granted Certain Employees of the Federal Government Serving Outside the United States
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered that Executive Order 10000, as amended, is further amended as follows:
Section 1. Section 201 is amended:
(a) by striking “(a)”; and
(b) by striking “, and (b) the words 'section 207 of the Act' have the meaning set forth in section 101 hereof.”
Sec. 2. Section 205 is amended by striking “(a)” and by striking subsection (b).
Sec. 3. Section 210 is amended:
(a) by striking “, but at least annually,” and
(b) by striking “if program or methodology revisions would substantially reduce an established differential or allowance rate, then”.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13208 of April 6, 2001
Amendment to Executive Order 13202, Preservation of Open Competition and Government Neutrality Towards Government Contractors' Labor Relations on Federal and Federally Funded Construction Projects
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act, 40 U.S.C. 471 et seq., and in order to (1) promote and ensure open competition on Federal and federally funded or assisted construction projects; (2) maintain Government neutrality towards Government contractors' labor relations on Federal and federally funded or assisted construction projects; (3) reduce construction costs to the Federal Government and to the tax payers; (4) expand job opportunities, especially for small and disadvantaged businesses; (5) prevent discrimination against Government contractors or their employees based upon labor affiliation or lack thereof; and (6) prevent the inefficiency that may result from the disruption of a previously established contractual relationship in particular cases; thereby promoting the economical, nondiscriminatory, and efficient administration and completion of Federal and federally funded or assisted construction projects, it is hereby ordered that Executive Order 13202 of February 17, 2001, is amended by adding to section 5 of that order the following new subsection:Start Printed Page 18718
(c)
The head of an executive agency, upon application of an awarding authority, a recipient of grants or financial assistance, a party to a cooperative agreement, or a construction manager acting on behalf of the foregoing, may exempt a particular project from the requirements of any or all of the provisions of sections 1 and 3 of this order, if the agency head finds: (i) that the awarding authority, recipient of grants or financial assistance, party to a cooperative agreement, or construction manager acting on behalf of the foregoing had issued or was a party to, as of the date of this order, bid specifications, project agreements, agreements with one or more labor organizations, or other controlling documents with respect to that particular project, which contained any of the requirements or prohibitions set forth in sections 1(a) or (b) of this order; and (ii) that one or more construction contracts subject to such requirements or prohibitions had been awarded as of the date of this order.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 22105
Executive Order 13209 of April 30, 2001
Amendment to Executive Order 13183, Establishment of the President's Task Force on Puerto Rico's Statis
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to extend by 3 months the time in which the President's Task Force on Puerto Rico's Status is to report to the President as directed in Executive Order 13183 of December 23, 2000, it is hereby ordered that section 4 of Executive Order 13183 is amended by deleting “May 1, 2001” and inserting in lieu thereof “August 1, 2001”.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13210 of May 2, 2001
President's Commission To Strengthen Social Security
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.), and to preserve Social Security for senior Americans while building wealth for younger Americans, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment. There is established the President's Commission to Strengthen Social Security (Commission).
Sec. 2.
Membership. The Commission shall be composed of sixteen members appointed by the President, of which no more than eight shall be members of the same political party. The President shall also designate two members of the Commission to act as co-chairs. The two co-chairs shall not be members of the same political party.
Sec. 3.
Mission. The mission of the Commission shall be to submit to the President bipartisan recommendations to modernize and restore fiscal soundness to the Social Security system according to the following principles: (a) Modernization must not change Social Security benefits for retirees or near-retirees;
(b) The entire Social Security surplus must be dedicated to Social Security only;
(c) Social Security payroll taxes must not be increased;
(d) Government must not invest Social Security funds in the stock market;
(e) Modernization must preserve Social Security's disability and survivors components; and
(f) Modernization must include individually controlled, voluntary personal retirement accounts, which will augment the Social Security safety net.
Sec. 4.
Administration. (a) The Social Security Administration shall, to the extent permitted by law, provide administrative support and funding for the Commission.
(b) Members of the Commission shall serve without any compensation for their work on the Commission. Members appointed from among private citizens of the United States, however, while engaged in the work of the Commission, may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in Government service (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707), to the extent funds are available.
(c) The Commission shall have a staff headed by an Executive Director, who shall be selected by the President. To the extent permitted by law, office space, analytical support, and additional staff support for the Commission shall be provided by executive branch departments and agencies as directed by the President.
(d) The Commission shall receive input from and provide briefings to the Congress, by procedures determined by the President in consultation with the congressional leadership and the Commission. Public hearings shall be held at the call of the co-chairs, in consultation with the President.
(e) The functions of the President under the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended, except for those in section 6 of that Act, that are applicable to the Commission, shall be performed by the Social Security Administration, Start Printed Page 22896in accordance with the guidelines that have been issued by the Administrator of General Services.
Sec. 5.
Reports. The Commission shall submit reports to the President as follows: (a) Interim Report. An interim report shall describe the challenges facing the Social Security system and the criteria by which the Commission will evaluate reform proposals. These criteria may include but are not limited to: solvency, sustainability, benefit adequacy, fair treatment across generations and demographic groups, total annual cost obligations, net impact on the Federal budget, impact upon national savings, impact on workforce participation, impact on employer-provided pension plans, rates of return, and protections against poverty.
(b) Final Report. The final report will set forth the Commission's recommendations, in accordance with its stated mission in section 3 of this order, regarding how to strengthen Social Security with personal accounts. The Commission shall submit its final report during the fall of 2001. The submission date shall be determined by the co-chairs in consultation with the President.
Sec. 6.
Termination. The Commission shall terminate 30 days after submitting its final report.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 28355
Executive Order 13211 of May 18, 2001
Actions Concerning Regulations That Significantly Affect Energy Supply, Distribution, or Use
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to appropriately weigh and consider the effects of the Federal Government's regulations on the supply, distribution, and use of energy, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. The Federal Government can significantly affect the supply, distribution, and use of energy. Yet there is often too little information regarding the effects that governmental regulatory action can have on energy. In order to provide more useful energy-related information and hence improve the quality of agency decisionmaking, I am requiring that agencies shall prepare a Statement of Energy Effects when undertaking certain agency actions. As described more fully below, such Statements of Energy Effects shall describe the effects of certain regulatory actions on energy supply, distribution, or use.
Sec. 2.
Preparation of a Statement of Energy Effects. (a) To the extent permitted by law, agencies shall prepare and submit a Statement of Energy Effects to the Administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Office of Management and Budget, for those matters identified as significant energy actions.
(b) A Statement of Energy Effects shall consist of a detailed statement by the agency responsible for the significant energy action relating to:
(i) any adverse effects on energy supply, distribution, or use (including a shortfall in supply, price increases, and increased use of foreign supplies) should the proposal be implemented, and
(ii) reasonable alternatives to the action with adverse energy effects and the expected effects of such alternatives on energy supply, distribution, and use.
(c) The Administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs shall provide guidance to the agencies on the implementation of this order and shall consult with other agencies as appropriate in the implementation of this order.
Sec. 3.
Submission and Publication of Statements. (a) Agencies shall submit their Statements of Energy Effects to the Administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Office of Management and Budget, whenever they present the related submission under Executive Order 12866 of September 30, 1993, or any successor order.
(b) Agencies shall publish their Statements of Energy Effects, or a summary thereof, in each related Notice of Proposed Rulemaking and in any resulting Final Rule.
Sec. 4.
Definitions. For purposes of this order:
(a) “Regulation” and “rule” have the same meaning as they do in Executive Order 12866 or any successor order.
(b) “Significant energy action” means any action by an agency (normally published in the Federal Register) that promulgates or is expected to lead to the promulgation of a final rule or regulation, including notices of inquiry, advance notices of proposed rulemaking, and notices of proposed rulemaking:
(1)(i) that is a significant regulatory action under Executive Order 12866 or any successor order, andStart Printed Page 28356
(ii) is likely to have a significant adverse effect on the supply, distribution, or use of energy; or
(2) that is designated by the Administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs as a significant energy action.
(c) “Agency” means any authority of the United States that is an “agency” under 44 U.S.C. 3502(1), other than those considered to be independent regulatory agencies, as defined in 44 U.S.C. 3502(5).
Sec. 5.
Judicial Review. Nothing in this order shall affect any otherwise available judicial review of agency action. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity by a party against the United States, its agencies or instrumentalities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 28357
Executive Order 13212 of May 18, 2001
Actions To Expedite Energy-Related Projects
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to take additional steps to expedite the increased supply and availability of energy to our Nation, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. The increased production and transmission of energy in a safe and environmentally sound manner is essential to the well-being of the American people. In general, it is the policy of this Administration that executive departments and agencies (agencies) shall take appropriate actions, to the extent consistent with applicable law, to expedite projects that will increase the production, transmission, or conservation of energy.
Sec. 2.
Actions to Expedite Energy-Related Projects.
For energy-related projects, agencies shall expedite their review of permits or take other actions as necessary to accelerate the completion of such projects, while maintaining safety, public health, and environmental protections. The agencies shall take such actions to the extent permitted by law and regulation, and where appropriate.
Sec. 3.
Interagency Task Force. There is established an interagency task force (Task Force) to monitor and assist the agencies in their efforts to expedite their review of permits or similar actions, as necessary, to accelerate the completion of energy-related projects, increase energy production and conservation, and improve transmission of energy. The Task Force also shall monitor and assist agencies in setting up appropriate mechanisms to coordinate Federal, State, tribal, and local permitting in geographic areas where increased permitting activity is expected. The Task Force shall be composed of representatives from the Departments of State, the Treasury, Defense, Agriculture, Housing and Urban Development, Justice, Commerce, Transportation, the Interior, Labor, Education, Health and Human Services, Energy, Veterans Affairs, the Environmental Protection Agency, Central Intelligence Agency, General Services Administration, Office of Management and Budget, Council of Economic Advisers, Domestic Policy Council, National Economic Council, and such other representatives as may be determined by the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality. The Task Force shall be chaired by the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality and housed at the Department of Energy for administrative purposes.
Sec. 4.
Judicial Review.
Nothing in this order shall affect any otherwise available judicial review of agency action. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law Start Printed Page 28358or equity by a party against the United States, its agencies or instrumentalities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13213 of May 22, 2001
Additional Measures With Respect To Prohibiting the Importation of Rough Diamonds From Sierra Leone
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.), section 5 of the United Nations Participation Act of 1945, as amended (22 U.S.C. 287c) (UNPA), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and in view of the national emergency described and declared in Executive Order 13194 of January 18, 2001, and United Nations Security Council Resolutions 1306 of July 5, 2000, and 1343 of March 7, 2001,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, take note that in Executive Order 13194, the President responded to, among other things, the insurgent Revolutionary United Front's (RUF) illicit trade in diamonds to fund its operations in the civil war in Sierra Leone by declaring a national emergency and, consistent with United Nations Security Council Resolution 1306, by prohibiting the importation into the United States of all rough diamonds from Sierra Leone except for those importations controlled through the Certificate of Origin regime of the Government of Sierra Leone. United Nations Security Council Resolution 1343 takes note that the bulk of RUF diamonds leaves Sierra Leone through Liberia and that such illicit trade cannot be conducted without the permission and involvement of Liberian government officials at the highest levels; determines that the active support provided by the Government of Liberia for the RUF and other armed rebel groups in neighboring countries constitutes a threat to international peace and security in the region; and decides that all states shall take the necessary measures to prevent the importation of all rough diamonds from Liberia, whether or not such diamonds originated in Liberia. The Government of Liberia's complicity in the RUF's illicit trade in diamonds and its other forms of support for the RUF are direct challenges to United States foreign policy objectives in the region as well as to the rule-based international order that is crucial to the peace and prosperity of the United States. Therefore, I find these actions by the Government of Liberia contribute to the unusual and extraordinary threat to the foreign policy of the United States described in Executive Order 13194 with respect to which the President declared a national emergency. In order to deal with that threat and to ensure further that the direct or indirect importation into the United States of rough diamonds from Sierra Leone will not contribute financial support to further aggressive actions by the RUF or to the RUF's procurement of weapons; to implement United Nations Security Council Resolution 1343; and to counteract, among other things, the Government of Liberia's facilitation of and participation in the RUF's illicit trade in diamonds through Liberia, I hereby order the following additional measures be taken with respect to prohibiting the importation of rough diamonds from Sierra Leone:
Section 1. Except to the extent provided in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding the existence of any rights or obligations conferred or imposed by any international agreement or any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date of this order, the direct or indirect importation into the United States of all rough diamonds from Liberia, whether or not such Start Printed Page 28830diamonds originated in Liberia, on or after the effective date of this order is prohibited.
Sec. 2. Any transaction by a United States person or within the United States that evades or avoids, or has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate, any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited. Any conspiracy formed to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
Sec. 3. The definitions contained in section 4 of Executive Order 13194 apply to the terms used in this order.
Sec. 4. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA and UNPA, as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government. All agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order, including modification, suspension, or termination of licenses or authorizations in effect as of the date of this order.
Sec. 5. This order is not intended to create, nor does it create, any right, benefit, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by a party against the United States, its agencies, officers, or any other person.
Sec. 6. (a) This order is effective at 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time on May 23, 2001.
(b) This order shall be transmitted to the Congress and published in the Federal Register.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 29447
Executive Order 13214 of May 28, 2001
President's Task Force To Improve Health Care Delivery for Our Nation's Veterans
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.), and in order to provide prompt and efficient access to consistently high quality health care for veterans who have served the Nation, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment. There is established the President's Task Force to Improve Health Care Delivery for Our Nation's Veterans (Task Force).
Sec. 2.
Membership. The Task Force shall be comprised of 15 members appointed by the President. Two of the 15 members shall serve as co-chairs of the Task Force. The Task Force membership shall include health care experts, officials familiar with Department of Veterans Affairs and Department of Defense health care systems, and representatives from veteran and military service organizations.
Sec. 3.
Mission. The mission of the Task Force shall be to:
(a)
identify ways to improve benefits and services for Department of Veterans Affairs beneficiaries and Department of Defense military retirees who are also eligible for benefits from the Department of Veterans Affairs through better coordination of the activities of the two departments;
(b)
review barriers and challenges that impede Department of Veterans Affairs and Department of Defense coordination, including budgeting processes, timely billing, cost accounting, information technology, and reimbursement. Identify opportunities to improve such business practices to ensure high quality and cost effective health care; and
(c)
identify opportunities for improved resource utilization through partnership between the Department of Veterans Affairs and the Department of Defense to maximize the use of resources and infrastructure, including: buildings, information technology and data sharing systems, procurement of supplies, equipment and services, and delivery of care.
Sec. 4.
Administration.
(a)
The Department of Veterans Affairs shall, to the extent permitted by law, provide administrative support and funding for the Task Force.
(b)
Members of the Task Force shall serve without any compensation for their work on the Task Force. Members appointed from among private citizens of the United States, however, while engaged in the work of the Task Force, may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in Government service (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707), to the extent funds are available.
(c)
The co-chairs of the Task Force shall appoint an Executive Director to coordinate administration of the Task Force. To the extent permitted by law, office space, analytical support, and additional staff support for the Commission shall be provided by executive branch departments and agencies as directed by the President.Start Printed Page 29448
(d)
The heads of the executive branch departments and agencies shall, to the extent permitted by law, provide the Task Force with information as requested by the co-chairs.
(e)
At the call of the co-chairs, the Task Force shall meet as necessary to accomplish its mission.
(f)
The functions of the President under the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended, except for those in section 6 of that Act, that are applicable to the Task Force, shall be performed by the Department of Veterans Affairs, in accordance with the guidelines that have been issued by the Administrator of General Services.
Sec. 5.
Reports. The Task Force shall report its findings and recommendations to the President, through the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and Secretary of Defense. The Task Force shall issue an interim report in 9 months from the date of the first meeting of the Task Force. The Task Force shall issue a final report prior to the end of the second year of operation.
Sec. 6.
Termination. The Task Force shall terminate 30 days after submitting its final report, but no later than 2 years from the date of this order.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13215 of May 31, 2001
President's Information Technology Advisory Committee,
Further Amendment to Executive Order 13035, as Amended
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the High-Performance Computing Act of 1991 (Public Law 102-194), as amended by the Next Generation Internet Research Act of 1998 (Public Law 105-305), and in order to extend the life of the President's Information Technology Advisory Committee so that it may continue to carry out its responsibilities, it is hereby ordered that Executive Order 13035 of February 11, 1997, as amended by Executive Orders 13092, 13113, and 13200 (Executive Order 13035, as amended), is further amended as follows:
Section 1. Section 1 of Executive Order 13035, as amended, is further amended by deleting the last sentence and inserting in lieu thereof: “Members appointed prior to June 1, 2001, shall serve until December 1, 2001, unless reappointed by the President. Members appointed or reappointed on or after June 1, 2001, shall serve for no more than 2 years from the date of their appointment, unless their period of service is extended by the President. The President shall designate two co-chairs from among the members of the Committee. A co-chair may serve for a term of 2 years or until the end of his or her service as a member of the Committee, whichever is the shorter period.”
Sec. 2. Section 4(b) of Executive Order 13035, as amended, is further amended by deleting “June 1, 2001,” and inserting in lieu thereof: “June 1, 2003.”
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 31373
Executive Order 13216 of June 6, 2001
Amendment to Executive Order 13125, Increasing Participation of Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders in Federal Programs
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America and in order to change the title of Executive Order 13125 of June 7, 1999, and to extend by 2 years the President's Advisory Commission on Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders that was created by Executive Order 13125, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. The title of Executive Order 13125 is deleted and the following title is inserted in lieu thereof: “Increasing Opportunity and Improving Quality of Life of Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders.”
Sec. 2. Section 9 of Executive Order 13125 is amended by deleting “2 years after the date of this Executive order unless the Commission is renewed by the President prior to the end of that 2-year period” and inserting in lieu thereof “on June 7, 2003, unless renewed by the President prior to that date.”
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13217 of June 18, 2001
Community-Based Alternatives for Individuals With
Disabilities
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to place qualified individuals with disabilities in community settings whenever appropriate, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. This order is issued consistent with the following findings and principles:
(a) The United States is committed to community-based alternatives for individuals with disabilities and recognizes that such services advance the best interests of Americans.
(b) The United States seeks to ensure that America's community-based programs effectively foster independence and participation in the community for Americans with disabilities.
(c) Unjustified isolation or segregation of qualified individuals with disabilities through institutionalization is a form of disability-based discrimination prohibited by Title II of the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), 42 U.S.C. 12101 et. seq. States must avoid disability-based discrimination unless doing so would fundamentally alter the nature of the service, program, or activity provided by the State.
(d) In Olmstead v. L.C., 527 U.S. 581 (1999) (the “Olmstead decision”), the Supreme Court construed Title II of the ADA to require States to place qualified individuals with mental disabilities in community settings, rather than in institutions, whenever treatment professionals determine that such placement is appropriate, the affected persons do not oppose such placement, and the State can reasonably accommodate the placement, taking into account the resources available to the State and the needs of others with disabilities.
(e) The Federal Government must assist States and localities to implement swiftly the Olmstead decision, so as to help ensure that all Americans have the opportunity to live close to their families and friends, to live more independently, to engage in productive employment, and to participate in community life.
Sec. 2.
Swift Implementation of the Olmstead Decision: Agency Responsibilities. (a) The Attorney General, the Secretaries of Health and Human Services, Education, Labor, and Housing and Urban Development, and the Commissioner of the Social Security Administration shall work cooperatively to ensure that the Olmstead decision is implemented in a timely manner. Specifically, the designated agencies should work with States to help them assess their compliance with the Olmstead decision and the ADA in providing services to qualified individuals with disabilities in community-based settings, as long as such services are appropriate to the needs of those individuals. These agencies should provide technical guidance and work cooperatively with States to achieve the goals of Title II of the ADA, particularly where States have chosen to develop comprehensive, effectively working plans to provide services to qualified individuals with disabilities in the most integrated settings. These agencies should also ensure that existing Federal resources are used in the most effective manner to support the goals of the ADA. The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall take the lead in coordinating these efforts.Start Printed Page 33156
(b) The Attorney General, the Secretaries of Health and Human Services, Education, Labor, and Housing and Urban Development, and the Commissioner of the Social Security Administration shall evaluate the policies, programs, statutes, and regulations of their respective agencies to determine whether any should be revised or modified to improve the availability of community-based services for qualified individuals with disabilities. The review shall focus on identifying affected populations, improving the flow of information about supports in the community, and removing barriers that impede opportunities for community placement. The review should ensure the involvement of consumers, advocacy organizations, providers, and relevant agency representatives. Each agency head should report to the President, through the Secretary of Health and Human Services, with the results of their evaluation within 120 days.
(c) The Attorney General and the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall fully enforce Title II of the ADA, including investigating and resolving complaints filed on behalf of individuals who allege that they have been the victims of unjustified institutionalization. Whenever possible, the Department of Justice and the Department of Health and Human Services should work cooperatively with States to resolve these complaints, and should use alternative dispute resolution to bring these complaints to a quick and constructive resolution.
(d) The agency actions directed by this order shall be done consistent with this Administration's budget.
Sec. 3.
Judicial Review. Nothing in this order shall affect any otherwise available judicial review of agency action. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity by a party against the United States, its agencies or instrumentalities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13218 of June 20, 2001
21st Century Workforce Initiative
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and laws of the United States of America, including the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.), and in order to promote the study and the development of strategies to address the needs of the 21st century workforce, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment of the Office of the 21st Century Workforce. (a) The Secretary of Labor is hereby directed to establish within the Department of Labor the Office of the 21st Century Workforce. The Office shall provide a focal point for the identification and study of issues relating to the workforce of the United States and the development of strategies for effectively addressing such issues.
(b) The Office of the 21st Century Workforce shall gather and disseminate information relating to workforce issues by conducting summits, conferences, field hearings, meetings, and other appropriate forums designed to encourage the participation of organizations and individuals interested in such issues, including business and labor organizations, academicians, employers, employees, and public officials at the local, State, and Federal levels.
(c) Among the issues to be addressed by the Office of the 21st Century Workforce shall be the identification of the ways in which the Department of Labor may streamline and update the information and services made available to the workforce by the Department; eliminate duplicative or overlapping rules and regulations; and eliminate statutory and regulatory barriers to assisting the workforce in successfully adapting to the challenges of the 21st century.
Sec. 2.
Establishment of the Council on the 21st Century Workforce.
(a)
Establishment and Composition of the Council.
(i) There is hereby established the “President's Council on the 21st Century Workforce” (Council).
(ii) The Council shall be composed of not more than 13 members who shall be appointed by the President. The membership shall include individuals who represent the views of business and labor organizations, Federal, State, and local governments, academicians and educators, and such other associations and entities as the President determines are appropriate. In addition, the Secretary of Labor and the Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall serve as ex officio members representing the views of the Federal Government. The Secretary of Labor shall be the Chairperson of the Council.
(b) Functions of the Council. The Council shall provide information and advice to the President through the Secretary of Labor, the Office of the 21st Century Workforce within the Department of Labor, and other appropriate Federal officials relating to issues affecting the 21st century workforce. These activities shall include:
(i) assessing the effects of rapid technological changes, demographic trends, globalization, changes in work processes, and the need for new and enhanced skills for workers, employers, and other related sectors of society;
(ii) examining current and alternative approaches to assisting workers and employers in adjusting to and benefitting from such changes, including Start Printed Page 33628opportunities for workplace education, retraining, access to assistive technologies and workplace supports, and skills upgrading;
(iii) identifying impediments to the adjustment to such changes by workers and employers and recommending approaches and policies that could remove those impediments;
(iv) assisting the Office of the 21st Century Workforce in reviewing programs carried out by the Department of Labor and identifying changes to such programs that would stream line and update their effectiveness in meeting the needs of the workforce; and
(v) analyzing such additional issues relating to the workforce and making such reports as the President or the Secretary of Labor may request.
(c) Administration of the Council.
(i) The Council shall meet on the call of the Chairperson, at a time and place designated by the Chairperson. The Chairperson may form subcommittees or working groups within the Council to address particular matters.
(ii) The Council may from time to time prescribe such procedures and policies relating to the activities of the Council as are not inconsistent with law or with the provisions of this order.
(iii) Each member of the Council who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall serve without compensation but shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in Federal service (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707).
(iv) The Department of Labor shall make available appropriate funding and administrative support to assist the Council in carrying out the functions under this section, including necessary office space, equipment, supplies, staff, and services. The Secretary of Labor shall perform the functions of the President under the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App.), as amended, except that of reporting to the Congress, with respect to the Council in accordance with the guidelines and procedures established by the Administrator of General Services.
(v) The heads of executive agencies shall, to the extent permitted by law, provide the Council with such information as it may require for purposes of carrying out the functions described in this section.
(d) Termination of the Council. The Council shall terminate 2 years from the date of this order unless extended by the President prior to such date.
Sec. 3.
Effect on Prior Orders.
(a) Amendments to Executive Order 13111 of January 12, 1999. In order to ensure the coordination and nonduplication of advice and information regarding 21st century workforce issues, section 6 of Executive Order 13111, relating to the functions of the Advisory Committee on Expanding Training Opportunities, is amended to read as follows:
“Sec. 6. Functions of the Advisory Committee. The Committee shall provide the President, through the Secretary of Labor (who shall ensure the coordination of the activities of the Committee with the activities undertaken pursuant to sections 1 and 2 of the Executive Order on the 21st Century Workforce Initiative), an independent assessment of:
(1) progress made by the Federal Government in its use and integration of technology in adult training programs, particularly in addressing the problems of adult illiteracy;
(2) how Federal Government programs, initiatives, and policies can encourage or accelerate training technology to provide more accessible, more timely, and more cost- effective training opportunities for all Americans;
(3) mechanisms for the Federal Government to widely deploy and utilize technology-mediated instruction so all Americans may take advantage of opportunities provided by learning technology;Start Printed Page 33629
(4) the appropriate Federal Government role in research and development for learning technologies and their applications in order to develop high-quality training and education opportunities for all Americans; and
(5) such other issues regarding emerging technologies in government training as specified by the Secretary of Labor.”
(b) Revocation of Executive Order 13174. Executive Order 13174 of October 27, 2000, relating to the establishment of the Commission on Workers, Communities, and Economic Change in the New Economy, is revoked.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 34777
Executive Order 13219 of June 26, 2001
Blocking Property of Persons Who Threaten International Stabilization Efforts in the Western Balkans
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.)(IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, have determined that the actions of persons engaged in, or assisting, sponsoring, or supporting, (i) extremist violence in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, southern Serbia, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and elsewhere in the Western Balkans region, or (ii) acts obstructing implementation of the Dayton Accords in Bosnia or United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244 of June 10, 1999, in Kosovo, threaten the peace in or diminish the security and stability of those areas and the wider region, undermine the authority, efforts, and objectives of the United Nations, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), and other international organizations and entities present in those areas and the wider region, and endanger the safety of persons participating in or providing support to the activities of those organizations and entities, including United States military forces and Government officials. I find that such actions constitute an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States, and hereby declare a national emergency to deal with that threat. I hereby order:
Section 1. (a) Except to the extent provided in section 203(b)(1), (3), and (4) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(1), (3), and (4)), the Trade Sanctions Reform and Export Enhancement Act of 2000 (title IX, Public Law 106-387), and in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may hereafter be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date, all property and interests in property of:
(i) the persons listed in the Annex to this order; and
(ii) persons designated by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, because they are found:
(A) to have committed, or to pose a significant risk of committing, acts of violence that have the purpose or effect of threatening the peace in or diminishing the stability or security of any area or state in the Western Balkans region, undermining the authority, efforts, or objectives of international organizations or entities present in the region, or endangering the safety of persons participating in or providing support to the activities of those international organizations or entities, or,
(B) to have actively obstructed, or to pose a significant risk of actively obstructing, implementation of the Dayton Accords in Bosnia or United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244 in Kosovo, or
(C) materially to assist in, sponsor, or provide financial or technological support for, or goods or services in support of, such acts of violence or obstructionism, or
(D) to be owned or controlled by, or acting or purporting to act directly or indirectly for or on behalf of, any of the foregoing persons, that are Start Printed Page 34778or hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of United States persons, are blocked and may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in.
(b) I hereby determine that the making of donations of the type specified in section 203(b)(2) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)) by United States persons to persons designated in or pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section would seriously impair my ability to deal with the national emergency declared in this order. Accordingly, the blocking of property and interests in property pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section includes, but is not limited to, the prohibition of the making by a United States person of any such donation to any such designated person, except as otherwise authorized by the Secretary of the Treasury.
(c) The blocking of property and interests in property pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section includes, but is not limited to, the prohibition of the making or receiving by a United States person of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services to or for the benefit of a person designated in or pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section.
Sec. 2. Any transaction by a United States person that evades or avoids, or has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate, any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited. Any conspiracy formed to violate the prohibitions of this order is prohibited.
Sec. 3. For the purposes of this order:
(a) The term “person” means an individual or entity;
(b) The term “entity” means a partnership, association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization; and
(c) The term “United States person” means any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States.
Sec. 4. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to me by IEEPA, as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government. All agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order and, where appropriate, to advise the Secretary of the Treasury in a timely manner of the measures taken.
Sec. 5. This order is not intended to create, nor does it create, any right, benefit, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by a party against the United States, its agencies, officers, or any other person.
Sec. 6. (a) This order is effective at 12:01 eastern daylight time on June 27, 2001;Start Printed Page 34779
(b) This order shall be transmitted to the Congress and published in the Federal Register.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
June 26, 2001.
Start Printed Page 34780
ANNEX
I. Individuals
Name/DPOB (If Available)AffiliationAdemi, Xhevat
DOB: 8 Dec 1962
POB: Tetovo, FYROMNLAAhmeti, Ali
DOB: 4 Jan 1959
POB: Kicevo, FYROMNLABexheti, Nuri
DOB: 1962
POB: Tetovo, FYROMNLADalipi, Tahir
DOB: 1958
POB: Ilince, Presevo mun., FRYPCPMBElshani, Gafur
DOB: 29 March 1958
POB: Suva Reka, FRYLPKGashi, Sabit
DOB: 30 December 1967
POB: Suva Reka, FRYLKCKHabibi, Skender
DOB: 13 July 1968
POB: Ljubiste, FRYPDKHaradinaj, Daut
DOB: 6 April 1978
POB: Goldane, FRYChief of Staff, KPCHasani, Xhavit
DOB: 5 May 1957
POB: Tanishec, FYROMNLALladrovici, Ramiz
DOB: 3 January 1966
POB:Deputy Commander, Guard & Rapid Reaction Group, KPCLushtaku, Sami
DOB: 20 February 1961
POB: Srbica, FRYRTG 2 Commander, KPCMusliu, Jonusz
DOB: 5 January 1959
POB: Konculj, FRYPCPMBMusliu, Shefqet
DOB: 12 February 1963
POB: Konculj, FRYUCPMBMustafa, Rrustem
DOB: 27 February 1971
POB: Podujevo, FRYRTG 6 Commander, KPCOstremi, Gezim
DOB: 1 November 1942
POB: Debar, MacedoniaNLASelimi, Rexhep
DOB: 15 March 1971
POB: Iglarevo, FRYCommander, Guard & Rapid Reaction Group, KPCShakiri, Hisni
DOB: 1 March 1949
POB: Otlja, FYROMNLAShaqiri, Shaqir
DOB: 1 September 1964
POB: FRYUCPMBSuma, Emrush
DOB: 27 May 1974
POB: Dimce, FRYNLASyla, Azem
DOB: 5 April 1951
POB: FRYPDKStart Printed Page 34781Veliu, Fazli
DOB: 4 January 1945
POB: Kercove, FYROMNLAXhemajli, Emrush
DOB: 5 May 1959
POB: Urosevac, FRYLPKXhemajli, Muhamet
DOB: 8 February 1958
POB: Muhovac, FRYUCPMB
II. Organizations
Liberation Army of Presevo, Medvedja, and Bujanovac (PMBLA a.k.a. UCPMB)
National Liberation Army (NLA a.k.a. UCK)
National Movement for the Liberation of Kosovo (LKCK)
Political Council of Presevo, Medvedja, and Bujanovac (PCPMB)
Popular Movement of Kosovo (LPK)
Executive Order 13220 of July 2, 2001
Waiver Under the Trade Act of 1974 With Respect to the Republic of Belarus
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including subsection 402(c)(2) of the Trade Act of 1974, as amended (the “Act”)(19 U.S.C. 2432(c)(2)), which continues to apply to the Republic of Belarus pursuant to subsection 402(d) of the Act (19 U.S.C. 2432(d)), and having made the report to the Congress required by subsection 402(c)(2), I hereby waive the application of subsections 402(a) and 402(b) of the Act with respect to the Republic of Belarus.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13221 of July 31, 2001
Energy Efficient Standby Power Devices
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the National Energy Conservation Policy Act (Public Law 95-619, 92 Stat. 3206, 42 U.S.C. 8252 et seq.), as amended by the Energy Policy Act of 1992 (EPACT) (Public Law 102-486, 106 Stat. 2776), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and in order to further encourage energy conservation by the Federal Government, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Energy Efficient Standby Power Devices. Each agency, when it purchases commercially available, off-the-shelf products that use external standby power devices, or that contain an internal standby power function, shall purchase products that use no more than one watt in their standby power consuming mode. If such products are not available, agencies shall purchase products with the lowest standby power wattage while in their standby power consuming mode. Agencies shall adhere to these requirements, when life-cycle cost-effective and practicable and where the relevant product's utility and performance are not compromised as a result. By December 31, 2001, and on an annual basis thereafter, the Department of Energy, in consultation with the Department of Defense and the General Services Administration, shall compile a preliminary list of products to be subject to these requirements. The Department of Energy shall finalize the list and may remove products deemed inappropriate for listing.
Sec. 2.
Independent Agencies. Independent agencies are encouraged to comply with the provisions of this order.
Sec. 3.
Definition. “Agency” means an executive agency as defined in 5 U.S.C. 105. For the purpose of this order, military departments, as defined in 5 U.S.C. 102, are covered by the Department of Defense.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13222 of August 17, 2001
Continuation of Export Control Regulations
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including but not limited to section 203 of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (“Act”) (50 U.S.C. 1702), I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, find that the unrestricted access of foreign parties to U.S. goods and technology and the existence of certain boycott practices of foreign nations, in light of the expiration of the Export Administration Act of 1979, as amended (50 U.S.C. App. 2401 et seq.), constitute an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy of the United States and hereby declare a national emergency with respect to that threat.
Accordingly, in order (a) to exercise the necessary vigilance over exports and activities affecting the national security of the United States; (b) to further significantly the foreign policy of the United States, including its policy with respect to cooperation by U.S. persons with certain foreign boycott activities, and to fulfill its international responsibilities; and (c) to protect the domestic economy from the excessive drain of scarce materials and reduce the serious economic impact of foreign demand, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. To the extent permitted by law, the provisions of the Export Administration Act of 1979, as amended, and the provisions for administration of the Export Administration Act of 1979, as amended, shall be carried out under this order so as to continue in full force and effect and amend, as necessary, the export control system heretofore maintained by the Export Administration Regulations issued under the Export Administration Act of 1979, as amended. The delegations of authority set forth in Executive Order 12002 of July 7, 1977, as amended by Executive Order 12755 of March 12, 1991, and Executive Order 13026 of November 15, 1996; Executive Order 12214 of May 2, 1980; Executive Order 12735 of November 16, 1990; and Executive Order 12851 of June 11, 1993, shall be incorporated in this order and shall apply to the exercise of authorities under this order. All actions under this order shall be in accordance with Presidential directives relating to the export control system heretofore issued and not revoked.
Sec. 2. All rules and regulations issued or continued in effect by the Secretary of Commerce under the authority of the Export Administration Act of 1979, as amended, including those published in Title 15, Subtitle B, Chapter VII, Subchapter C, of the Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 730 through 774, and all orders, regulations, licenses, and other forms of administrative action issued, taken, or continued in effect pursuant thereto, shall, until amended or revoked by the Secretary of Commerce, remain in full force and effect as if issued or taken pursuant to this order, except that the provisions of sections 203(b)(2) and 206 of the Act (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2) and 1705) shall control over any inconsistent provisions in the regulations. Nothing in this section shall affect the continued applicability of administrative sanctions provided for by the regulations described above.
Sec. 3. Provisions for administration of section 38(e) of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2778(e)) may be made and shall continue in full force and effect until amended or revoked under the authority of section 203 of the Act (50 U.S.C. 1702). To the extent permitted by law, this Start Printed Page 44026order also shall constitute authority for the issuance and continuation in full force and effect of all rules and regulations by the President or his delegate, and all orders, licenses, and other forms of administrative actions issued, taken, or continued in effect pursuant thereto, relating to the administration of section 38(e).
Sec. 4. This order shall be effective as of midnight between August 20, 2001, and August 21, 2001, eastern daylight time.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 48201
Executive Order 13223 of September 14, 2001
Ordering the Ready Reserve of the Armed Forces To Active Duty and Delegating Certain Authorities to the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Transportation
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and in furtherance of the proclamation of September 14, 2001, Declaration of National Emergency by Reason of Certain Terrorist Attacks, which declared a national emergency by reason of the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center, New York, New York, and the Pentagon, and the continuing and immediate threat of further attacks on the United States, I hereby order as follows:
Section 1. To provide additional authority to the Department of Defense and the Department of Transportation to respond to the continuing and immediate threat of further attacks on the United States, the authority under title 10, United States Code, to order any unit, and any member of the Ready Reserve not assigned to a unit organized to serve as a unit, in the Ready Reserve to active duty for not more than 24 consecutive months, is invoked and made available, according to its terms, to the Secretary concerned, subject in the case of the Secretaries of the Army, Navy, and Air Force, to the direction of the Secretary of Defense. The term “Secretary concerned” is defined in section 101(a)(9) of title 10, United States Code, to mean the Secretary of the Army with respect to the Army; the Secretary of the Navy with respect to the Navy, the Marine Corps, and the Coast Guard when it is operating as a service in the Navy; the Secretary of the Air Force with respect to the Air Force; and the Secretary of Transportation with respect to the Coast Guard when it is not operating as a service in the Navy.
Sec. 2. To allow for the orderly administration of personnel within the armed forces, the following authorities vested in the President are hereby invoked to the full extent provided by the terms thereof: section 527 of title 10, United States Code, to suspend the operation of sections 523, 525, and 526 of that title, regarding officer and warrant officer strength and distribution; and sections 123, 123a, and 12006 of title 10, United States Code, to suspend certain laws relating to promotion, involuntary retirement, and separation of commissioned officers; end strength limitations; and Reserve component officer strength limitations.
Sec. 3. To allow for the orderly administration of personnel within the armed forces, the authorities vested in the President by sections 331, 359, and 367 of title 14, United States Code, relating to the authority to order to active duty certain officers and enlisted members of the Coast Guard and to detain enlisted members, are invoked to the full extent provided by the terms thereof.
Sec. 4. The Secretary of Defense is hereby designated and empowered, without the approval, ratification, or other action by the President, to exercise the authority vested in the President by sections 123, 123a, 527, and 12006 of title 10, United States Code, as invoked by sections 2 and 3 of this order.Start Printed Page 48202
Sec. 5. The Secretary of Transportation is hereby designated and empowered, without the approval, ratification, or other action by the President, to exercise the authority vested in sections 331, 359, and 367 of title 14, United States Code, when the Coast Guard is not serving as part of the Navy, as invoked by section 2 of this order, to recall any regular officer or enlisted member on the retired list to active duty and to detain any enlisted member beyond the term of his or her enlistment.
Sec. 6. The authority delegated by this order to the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Transportation may be redelegated and further subdelegated to civilian subordinates who are appointed to their offices by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
Sec. 7. Based upon my determination under 10 U.S.C. 2201(c) that it is necessary to increase (subject to limits imposed by law) the number of members of the armed forces on active duty beyond the number for which funds are provided in appropriation Acts for the Department of Defense, the Secretary of Defense may provide for the cost of such additional members as an excepted expense under section 11(a) of title 41, United States Code.
Sec. 8. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch, and is not intended to create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by a party against the United States, its agencies, its officers, or any person.
Sec. 9. This order is effective immediately and shall be promptly transmitted to the Congress and published in the Federal Register.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13224 of September 23, 2001
Blocking Property and Prohibiting Transactions With Persons Who Commit, Threaten To Commit, or Support Terrorism
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.)(IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.), section 5 of the United Nations Participation Act of 1945, as amended (22 U.S.C. 287c) (UNPA), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and in view of United Nations Security Council Resolution (UNSCR) 1214 of December 8, 1998, UNSCR 1267 of October 15, 1999, UNSCR 1333 of December 19, 2000, and the multilateral sanctions contained therein, and UNSCR 1363 of July 30, 2001, establishing a mechanism to monitor the implementation of UNSCR 1333,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, find that grave acts of terrorism and threats of terrorism committed by foreign terrorists, including the terrorist attacks in New York, Pennsylvania, and the Pentagon committed on September 11, 2001, acts recognized and condemned in UNSCR 1368 of September 12, 2001, and UNSCR 1269 of October 19, 1999, and the continuing and immediate threat of further attacks on United States nationals or the United States constitute an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy of the United States, and in furtherance of my proclamation of September 14, 2001, Declaration of National Emergency by Reason of Certain Terrorist Attacks, hereby declare a national emergency to deal with that threat. I also find that because of the pervasiveness and expansiveness of the financial foundation of foreign terrorists, financial sanctions may be appropriate for those foreign persons that support or otherwise associate with these foreign terrorists. I also find that a need exists for further consultation and cooperation with, and sharing of information by, United States and foreign financial institutions as an additional tool to enable the United States to combat the financing of terrorism.
I hereby order:
Section 1. Except to the extent required by section 203(b) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)), or provided in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date of this order, all property and interests in property of the following persons that are in the United States or that hereafter come within the United States, or that hereafter come within the possession or control of United States persons are blocked:
(a) foreign persons listed in the Annex to this order;
(b) foreign persons determined by the Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury and the Attorney General, to have committed, or to pose a significant risk of committing, acts of terrorism that threaten the security of U.S. nationals or the national security, foreign policy, or economy of the United States;
(c) persons determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State and the Attorney General, to be owned or controlled by, or to act for or on behalf of those persons listed in the Annex to this order or those persons determined to be subject to subsection 1(b), 1(c), or 1(d)(i) of this order;Start Printed Page 49080
(d) except as provided in section 5 of this order and after such consultation, if any, with foreign authorities as the Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury and the Attorney General, deems appropriate in the exercise of his discretion, persons determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State and the Attorney General;
(i) to assist in, sponsor, or provide financial, material, or technological support for, or financial or other services to or in support of, such acts of terrorism or those persons listed in the Annex to this order or determined to be subject to this order; or
(ii) to be otherwise associated with those persons listed in the Annex to this order or those persons determined to be subject to subsection 1(b), 1(c), or 1(d)(i) of this order.
Sec. 2. Except to the extent required by section 203(b) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)), or provided in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date:
(a) any transaction or dealing by United States persons or within the United States in property or interests in property blocked pursuant to this order is prohibited, including but not limited to the making or receiving of any contribution of funds, goods, or services to or for the benefit of those persons listed in the Annex to this order or determined to be subject to this order;
(b) any transaction by any United States person or within the United States that evades or avoids, or has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate, any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited; and
(c) any conspiracy formed to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
Sec. 3. For purposes of this order:
(a) the term “person” means an individual or entity;
(b) the term “entity” means a partnership, association, corporation, or other organization, group, or subgroup;
(c) the term “United States person” means any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States; and
(d) the term “terrorism” means an activity that—
(i) involves a violent act or an act dangerous to human life, property, or infrastructure; and
(ii) appears to be intended—
(A) to intimidate or coerce a civilian population;
(B) to influence the policy of a government by intimidation or coercion; or
(C) to affect the conduct of a government by mass destruction, assassination, kidnapping, or hostage-taking.
Sec. 4. I hereby determine that the making of donations of the type specified in section 203(b)(2) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)) by United States persons to persons determined to be subject to this order would seriously impair my ability to deal with the national emergency declared in this order, and would endanger Armed Forces of the United States that are in a situation where imminent involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated by the circumstances, and hereby prohibit such donations as provided by section 1 of this order. Furthermore, I hereby determine that the Trade Sanctions Reform and Export Enhancement Act of 2000 (title IX, Public Law 106-387) shall not affect the imposition or the continuation of the imposition of any unilateral agricultural sanction or unilateral medical sanction on Start Printed Page 49081any person determined to be subject to this order because imminent involvement of the Armed Forces of the United States in hostilities is clearly indicated by the circumstances.
Sec. 5. With respect to those persons designated pursuant to subsection 1(d) of this order, the Secretary of the Treasury, in the exercise of his discretion and in consultation with the Secretary of State and the Attorney General, may take such other actions than the complete blocking of property or interests in property as the President is authorized to take under IEEPA and UNPA if the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State and the Attorney General, deems such other actions to be consistent with the national interests of the United States, considering such factors as he deems appropriate.
Sec. 6. The Secretary of State, the Secretary of the Treasury, and other appropriate agencies shall make all relevant efforts to cooperate and coordinate with other countries, including through technical assistance, as well as bilateral and multilateral agreements and arrangements, to achieve the objectives of this order, including the prevention and suppression of acts of terrorism, the denial of financing and financial services to terrorists and terrorist organizations, and the sharing of intelligence about funding activities in support of terrorism.
Sec. 7. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State and the Attorney General, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA and UNPA as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government. All agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order.
Sec. 8. Nothing in this order is intended to affect the continued effectiveness of any rules, regulations, orders, licenses, or other forms of administrative action issued, taken, or continued in effect heretofore or hereafter under 31 C.F.R. chapter V, except as expressly terminated, modified, or suspended by or pursuant to this order.
Sec. 9. Nothing contained in this order is intended to create, nor does it create, any right, benefit, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by a party against the United States, its agencies, officers, employees or any other person.
Sec. 10. For those persons listed in the Annex to this order or determined to be subject to this order who might have a constitutional presence in the United States, I find that because of the ability to transfer funds or assets instantaneously, prior notice to such persons of measures to be taken pursuant to this order would render these measures ineffectual. I therefore determine that for these measures to be effective in addressing the national emergency declared in this order, there need be no prior notice of a listing or determination made pursuant to this order.
Sec. 11. (a) This order is effective at 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time on September 24, 2001.Start Printed Page 49082
(b) This order shall be transmitted to the Congress and published in the Federal Register.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
September 23, 2001.
Start Printed Page 49083
Start Printed Page 50291
Executive Order 13225 of September 28, 2001
Continuance of Certain Federal Advisory Committees
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in accordance with the provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.), it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Each advisory committee listed below is continued until September 30, 2003.
(a) Committee for the Preservation of the White House; Executive Order 11145, as amended (Department of the Interior).
(b) Federal Advisory Council on Occupational Safety and Health; Executive Order 12196, as amended (Department of Labor).
(c) President's Advisory Commission on Educational Excellence for Hispanic Americans; Executive Order 12900 (Department of Education).
(d) President's Board of Advisors on Historically Black Colleges and Universities; Executive Order 13021, as amended, (Department of Education).
(e) President's Board of Advisors on Tribal Colleges and Universities; Executive Order 13021, as amended (Department of Education).
(f) President's Commission on White House Fellowships; Executive Order 11183, as amended (Office of Personnel Management).
(g) President's Committee on the Arts and the Humanities; Executive Order 12367, as amended (National Endowment for the Arts).
(h) President's Committee on the International Labor Organization; Executive Order 12216, as amended (Department of Labor).
(i) President's Committee on the National Medal of Science; Executive Order 11287, as amended (National Science Foundation).
(j) President's Committee on Mental Retardation; Executive Order 12994 (Department of Health and Human Services).
(k) President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports; Executive Order 12345, as amended (Department of Health and Human Services).
(l) President's Export Council; Executive Order 12131, as amended (Department of Commerce).
(m) President's National Security Telecommunications Advisory Committee; Executive Order 12382, as amended (Department of Defense).
(n) Trade and Environment Policy Advisory Committee; Executive Order 12905 (Office of the United States Trade Representative).
Sec. 2. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other Executive Order, the functions of the President under the Federal Advisory Committee Act that are applicable to the committees listed in section 1 of this order shall be performed by the head of the department or agency designated after each committee, in accordance with the guidelines and procedures established by the Administrator of General Services.
Sec. 3. The following Executive Orders, or sections thereof, which established committees that have terminated and whose work is completed, are revoked:
(a) Sections 3 and 4 of Executive Order 13134 pertaining to the establishment and administration of the Advisory Committee on Biobased Products Start Printed Page 50292and Bioenergy, superseded by the Biomass Research and Development Technical Advisory Committee established pursuant to section 306 of the Biomass Research and Development Act of 2000 (Title III of Public Law 106-224);
(b) Executive Order 13080, establishing the American Heritage Rivers Initiative Advisory Committee;
(c) Executive Order 13090, as amended by Executive Order 13136, establishing the President's Commission on the Celebration of Women in American History;
(d) Executive Order 13168, establishing the President's Commission on Improving Economic Opportunity in Communities Dependent on Tobacco Production While Protecting Public Health; and
(e) Executive Order 13075, establishing the Special Oversight Board for Department of Defense Investigations of Gulf War Chemical and Biological Incidents.
Sec. 4. Sections 1 through 4 of Executive Order 13138 are superseded.
Sec. 5. This order shall be effective September 30, 2001.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13226 of September 30, 2001
President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.), and in order to establish an advisory committee on science and technology, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment. There is established the President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST). The PCAST shall be composed of not more than 25 members, one of whom shall be a Federal Government official designated by the President (the “Official”), and 24 of whom shall be nonfederal members appointed by the President and have diverse perspectives and expertise in science, technology, and the impact of science and technology on the Nation. The Official shall co-chair PCAST with a nonfederal member designated by the President.
Sec. 2.
Functions. (a) The PCAST shall advise the President, through the Official, on matters involving science and technology policy.
(b) In performance of its advisory duties, the PCAST shall assist the National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) in securing private sector involvement in its activities.
Sec. 3.
Administration. (a) The heads of the executive departments and agencies shall, to the extent permitted by law, provide the PCAST with information concerning scientific and technological matters when requested by the PCAST co-chairs.
(b) In consultation with the Official, the PCAST is authorized to convene ad hoc working groups to provide preliminary nonbinding information and advice directly to the PCAST.
(c) Members shall serve without compensation for their work on the PCAST. However, members may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in the government service (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707).
(d) Any expenses of the PCAST shall be paid from the funds available for the expenses of the Office of Science and Technology Policy.
(e) The Office of Science and Technology Policy shall provide such administrative services as the PCAST may require, with the approval of the Official.
Sec. 4.
General. (a) Notwithstanding any other Executive Order, the functions of the President with respect to the PCAST under the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended, except that of reporting to the Congress, shall be performed by the Office of Science and Technology Policy in accordance with the guidelines and procedures established by the Administrator of General Services.
(b) The PCAST shall terminate 2 years from the date of this order unless extended by the President prior to that date.Start Printed Page 50524
(c) Executive Order 12882 of November 23, 1993; Executive Order 12907 of April 14, 1994; and section 1(h) of Executive Order 13138 of September 30, 1999, are hereby revoked.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13227 of October 2, 2001
President's Commission on Excellence in Special Education
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. The education of all children, regardless of background or disability, while chiefly a State and local responsibility, must always be a national priority. One of the most important goals of my Administration is to support States and local communities in creating and maintaining a system of public education where no child is left behind. Unfortunately, among those at greatest risk of being left behind are children with disabilities. The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) is a landmark statute that asserts the rights of all children with disabilities to a free, appropriate public education. My Administration strongly supports the principles embodied in the IDEA and the goal of providing special education and related services to children with disabilities so that they can meet high academic standards and participate fully in American society. It is imperative that special education operate as an integral part of a system that expects high achievement of all children, rather than as a means of avoiding accountability for children who are more challenging to educate or who have fallen behind.
Sec. 2.
Establishment. There is established a President's Commission on Excellence in Special Education (the “Commission”). The Commission shall be composed of not more than 19 members to be appointed by the President from the public and private sectors, as well as up to 5 ex officio members from the Departments of Education and Health and Human Services. The members may include current and former Federal, State, and local government officials, recognized special education experts, special and general education finance experts, education researchers, educational practitioners, parents of children or young adults with disabilities, persons with disabilities, and others with special experience and expertise in the education of children with disabilities. The President shall designate a Chairperson from among the members of the Commission. The Secretary of Education shall select an Executive Director for the Commission.
Sec. 3.
Duties and Commission Report. (a) The Commission shall collect information and study issues related to Federal, State, and local special education programs with the goal of recommending policies for improving the educational performance of students with disabilities. In furtherance of its duties, the Commission shall invite experts and members of the public to provide information and guidance.
(b) Not later than April 30, 2002, the Commission shall prepare and submit a report to the President outlining its findings and recommendations. The report shall include, but need not be limited to:
(1) An examination of available research and information on the effectiveness and cost of special education and the appropriate role of the Federal Government in special education programming and funding. The examination shall include an analysis of the factors that have contributed to the growth in costs of special education since the enactment of the Education for All Handicapped Children Act (a predecessor of IDEA);
(2) Recommendations regarding how Federal resources can best be used to improve educational results for students with disabilities;
(3) A recommended special education research agenda;Start Printed Page 51288
(4) An analysis of the impact of providing appropriate early intervention in reading instruction on the referral and identification of children for special education;
(5) An analysis of the effect of special education funding on decisions to serve, place, or refer children for special education services and recommendations for alternative funding formulae that might distribute funds to achieve better results and eliminate any current incentives that undermine the goals of ensuring that children with disabilities receive a high-quality education;
(6) An analysis of, and recommendations regarding, how the Federal Government can help States and local education agencies provide a high-quality education to students with disabilities, including the recruitment and retention of qualified personnel and the inclusion of children with disabilities in performance and accountability systems;
(7) An analysis of the impact of Federal and State statutory, regulatory, and administrative requirements on the cost and effectiveness of special education services, and how these requirements support or hinder the educational achievement of students with disabilities;
(8) An assessment of how differences in local educational agency size, location, demographics, and wealth, and in State law and practice affect which children are referred to special education, and the cost of special education; and
(9) A review of the experiences of State and local governments in financing special education, and an analysis of whether changes to the Federal “supplement not supplant” and “maintenance of effort” requirements are appropriate.
Sec. 4.
Administration, Compensation, and Termination.
(a) The Department of Education shall, to the extent permitted by law, provide administrative support and funding for the Commission. In addition, appropriate Federal agencies may designate staff to assist with the work of the Commission. To the extent permitted by law, Federal Government employees may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement to the Federal agency.
(b) Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation but, while engaged in the work of the Commission, members appointed from among private citizens of the United States shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in the government service (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707), to the extent funds are available for such purposes.
(c) The functions of the President under the Federal Advisory Committee Act that are applicable to the Commission, except that of reporting to the Congress, shall be performed by the Department of Education in accordance with the guidelines that have been issued by the Administrator of General Services.
(d) The Chairperson may from time to time prescribe such rules, procedures, and policies relating to the activities of the Commission as are not inconsistent with law or with the provisions of this order.Start Printed Page 51289
(e) The Commission shall terminate 30 days after submitting its final report, unless extended by the President.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 51812
Executive Order 13228 of October 8, 2001
Establishing the Office of Homeland Security and the Homeland Security Council
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment. I hereby establish within the Executive Office of the President an Office of Homeland Security (the “Office”) to be headed by the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security.
Sec. 2.
Mission. The mission of the Office shall be to develop and coordinate the implementation of a comprehensive national strategy to secure the United States from terrorist threats or attacks. The Office shall perform the functions necessary to carry out this mission, including the functions specified in section 3 of this order.
Sec. 3.
Functions. The functions of the Office shall be to coordinate the executive branch's efforts to detect, prepare for, prevent, protect against, respond to, and recover from terrorist attacks within the United States.
(a)
National Strategy. The Office shall work with executive departments and agencies, State and local governments, and private entities to ensure the adequacy of the national strategy for detecting, preparing for, preventing, protecting against, responding to, and recovering from terrorist threats or attacks within the United States and shall periodically review and coordinate revisions to that strategy as necessary.
(b)
Detection. The Office shall identify priorities and coordinate efforts for collection and analysis of information within the United States regarding threats of terrorism against the United States and activities of terrorists or terrorist groups within the United States. The Office also shall identify, in coordination with the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, priorities for collection of intelligence outside the United States regarding threats of terrorism within the United States.
(i)
In performing these functions, the Office shall work with Federal, State, and local agencies, as appropriate, to:
(A)
facilitate collection from State and local governments and private entities of information pertaining to terrorist threats or activities within the United States;
(B)
coordinate and prioritize the requirements for foreign intelligence relating to terrorism within the United States of executive departments and agencies responsible for homeland security and provide these requirements and priorities to the Director of Central Intelligence and other agencies responsible for collection of foreign intelligence;
(C)
coordinate efforts to ensure that all executive departments and agencies that have intelligence collection responsibilities have sufficient technological capabilities and resources to collect intelligence and data relating to terrorist activities or possible terrorist acts within the United States, working with the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, as appropriate;
(D)
coordinate development of monitoring protocols and equipment for use in detecting the release of biological, chemical, and radiological hazards; andStart Printed Page 51813
(E)
ensure that, to the extent permitted by law, all appropriate and necessary intelligence and law enforcement information relating to homeland security is disseminated to and exchanged among appropriate executive departments and agencies responsible for homeland security and, where appropriate for reasons of homeland security, promote exchange of such information with and among State and local governments and private entities.
(ii)
Executive departments and agencies shall, to the extent permitted by law, make available to the Office all information relating to terrorist threats and activities within the United States.
(c)
Preparedness. The Office of Homeland Security shall coordinate national efforts to prepare for and mitigate the consequences of terrorist threats or attacks within the United States. In performing this function, the Office shall work with Federal, State, and local agencies, and private entities, as appropriate, to:
(i)
review and assess the adequacy of the portions of all Federal emergency response plans that pertain to terrorist threats or attacks within the United States;
(ii)
coordinate domestic exercises and simulations designed to assess and practice systems that would be called upon to respond to a terrorist threat or attack within the United States and coordinate programs and activities for training Federal, State, and local employees who would be called upon to respond to such a threat or attack;
(iii)
coordinate national efforts to ensure public health preparedness for a terrorist attack, including reviewing vaccination policies and reviewing the adequacy of and, if necessary, increasing vaccine and pharmaceutical stockpiles and hospital capacity;
(iv)
coordinate Federal assistance to State and local authorities and nongovernmental organizations to prepare for and respond to terrorist threats or attacks within the United States;
(v)
ensure that national preparedness programs and activities for terrorist threats or attacks are developed and are regularly evaluated under appropriate standards and that resources are allocated to improving and sustaining preparedness based on such evaluations; and
(vi)
ensure the readiness and coordinated deployment of Federal response teams to respond to terrorist threats or attacks, working with the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, when appropriate.
(d)
Prevention. The Office shall coordinate efforts to prevent terrorist attacks within the United States. In performing this function, the Office shall work with Federal, State, and local agencies, and private entities, as appropriate, to:
(i)
facilitate the exchange of information among such agencies relating to immigration and visa matters and shipments of cargo; and, working with the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, ensure coordination among such agencies to prevent the entry of terrorists and terrorist materials and supplies into the United States and facilitate removal of such terrorists from the United States, when appropriate;
(ii)
coordinate efforts to investigate terrorist threats and attacks within the United States; and
(iii)
coordinate efforts to improve the security of United States borders, territorial waters, and airspace in order to prevent acts of terrorism within the United States, working with the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, when appropriate.
(e)
Protection. The Office shall coordinate efforts to protect the United States and its critical infrastructure from the consequences of terrorist attacks. In performing this function, the Office shall work with Federal, State, and local agencies, and private entities, as appropriate, to:Start Printed Page 51814
(i)
strengthen measures for protecting energy production, transmission, and distribution services and critical facilities; other utilities; telecommunications; facilities that produce, use, store, or dispose of nuclear material; and other critical infrastructure services and critical facilities within the United States from terrorist attack;
(ii)
coordinate efforts to protect critical public and privately owned information systems within the United States from terrorist attack;
(iii)
develop criteria for reviewing whether appropriate security measures are in place at major public and privately owned facilities within the United States;
(iv)
coordinate domestic efforts to ensure that special events determined by appropriate senior officials to have national significance are protected from terrorist attack;
(v)
coordinate efforts to protect transportation systems within the United States, including railways, highways, shipping, ports and waterways, and airports and civilian aircraft, from terrorist attack;
(vi)
coordinate efforts to protect United States livestock, agriculture, and systems for the provision of water and food for human use and consumption from terrorist attack; and
(vii)
coordinate efforts to prevent unauthorized access to, development of, and unlawful importation into the United States of, chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear, explosive, or other related materials that have the potential to be used in terrorist attacks.
(f)
Response and Recovery. The Office shall coordinate efforts to respond to and promote recovery from terrorist threats or attacks within the United States. In performing this function, the Office shall work with Federal, State, and local agencies, and private entities, as appropriate, to:
(i)
coordinate efforts to ensure rapid restoration of transportation systems, energy production, transmission, and distribution systems; telecommunications; other utilities; and other critical infrastructure facilities after disruption by a terrorist threat or attack;
(ii)
coordinate efforts to ensure rapid restoration of public and private critical information systems after disruption by a terrorist threat or attack;
(iii)
work with the National Economic Council to coordinate efforts to stabilize United States financial markets after a terrorist threat or attack and manage the immediate economic and financial consequences of the incident;
(iv)
coordinate Federal plans and programs to provide medical, financial, and other assistance to victims of terrorist attacks and their families; and
(v)
coordinate containment and removal of biological, chemical, radiological, explosive, or other hazardous materials in the event of a terrorist threat or attack involving such hazards and coordinate efforts to mitigate the effects of such an attack.
(g)
Incident Management. The Assistant to the President for Homeland Security shall be the individual primarily responsible for coordinating the domestic response efforts of all departments and agencies in the event of an imminent terrorist threat and during and in the immediate aftermath of a terrorist attack within the United States and shall be the principal point of contact for and to the President with respect to coordination of such efforts. The Assistant to the President for Homeland Security shall coordinate with the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, as appropriate.
(h)
Continuity of Government. The Assistant to the President for Homeland Security, in coordination with the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, shall review plans and preparations for ensuring the continuity of the Federal Government in the event of a terrorist attack that threatens the safety and security of the United States Government or its leadership.Start Printed Page 51815
(i)
Public Affairs. The Office, subject to the direction of the White House Office of Communications, shall coordinate the strategy of the executive branch for communicating with the public in the event of a terrorist threat or attack within the United States. The Office also shall coordinate the development of programs for educating the public about the nature of terrorist threats and appropriate precautions and responses.
(j)
Cooperation with State and Local Governments and Private Entities. The Office shall encourage and invite the participation of State and local governments and private entities, as appropriate, in carrying out the Office's functions.
(k)
Review of Legal Authorities and Development of Legislative Proposals. The Office shall coordinate a periodic review and assessment of the legal authorities available to executive departments and agencies to permit them to perform the functions described in this order. When the Office determines that such legal authorities are inadequate, the Office shall develop, in consultation with executive departments and agencies, proposals for presidential action and legislative proposals for submission to the Office of Management and Budget to enhance the ability of executive departments and agencies to perform those functions. The Office shall work with State and local governments in assessing the adequacy of their legal authorities to permit them to detect, prepare for, prevent, protect against, and recover from terrorist threats and attacks.
(l)
Budget Review. The Assistant to the President for Homeland Security, in consultation with the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (the “Director”) and the heads of executive departments and agencies, shall identify programs that contribute to the Administration's strategy for homeland security and, in the development of the President's annual budget submission, shall review and provide advice to the heads of departments and agencies for such programs. The Assistant to the President for Homeland Security shall provide advice to the Director on the level and use of funding in departments and agencies for homeland security-related activities and, prior to the Director's forwarding of the proposed annual budget submission to the President for transmittal to the Congress, shall certify to the Director the funding levels that the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security believes are necessary and appropriate for the homeland security-related activities of the executive branch.
Sec. 4.
Administration.
(a) The Office of Homeland Security shall be directed by the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security.
(b) The Office of Administration within the Executive Office of the President shall provide the Office of Homeland Security with such personnel, funding, and administrative support, to the extent permitted by law and subject to the availability of appropriations, as directed by the Chief of Staff to carry out the provisions of this order.
(c) Heads of executive departments and agencies are authorized, to the extent permitted by law, to detail or assign personnel of such departments and agencies to the Office of Homeland Security upon request of the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security, subject to the approval of the Chief of Staff.
Sec. 5.
Establishment of Homeland Security Council.
(a) I hereby establish a Homeland Security Council (the “Council”), which shall be responsible for advising and assisting the President with respect to all aspects of homeland security. The Council shall serve as the mechanism for ensuring coordination of homeland security-related activities of executive departments and agencies and effective development and implementation of homeland security policies.
(b) The Council shall have as its members the President, the Vice President, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of Defense, the Attorney General, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Secretary of Transportation, Start Printed Page 51816the Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Director of Central Intelligence, the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security, and such other officers of the executive branch as the President may from time to time designate. The Chief of Staff, the Chief of Staff to the Vice President, the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, the Counsel to the President, and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget also are invited to attend any Council meeting. The Secretary of State, the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of Energy, the Secretary of Labor, the Secretary of Commerce, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Assistant to the President for Economic Policy, and the Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy shall be invited to attend meetings pertaining to their responsibilities. The heads of other executive departments and agencies and other senior officials shall be invited to attend Council meetings when appropriate.
(c) The Council shall meet at the President's direction. When the President is absent from a meeting of the Council, at the President's direction the Vice President may preside. The Assistant to the President for Homeland Security shall be responsible, at the President's direction, for determining the agenda, ensuring that necessary papers are prepared, and recording Council actions and Presidential decisions.
Sec. 6.
Original Classification Authority. I hereby delegate the authority to classify information originally as Top Secret, in accordance with Executive Order 12958 or any successor Executive Order, to the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security.
Sec. 7.
Continuing Authorities. This order does not alter the existing authorities of United States Government departments and agencies. All executive departments and agencies are directed to assist the Council and the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security in carrying out the purposes of this order.
Sec. 8.
General Provisions.
(a) This order does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies or instrumentalities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
(b) References in this order to State and local governments shall be construed to include tribal governments and United States territories and other possessions.
(c) References to the “United States” shall be construed to include United States territories and possessions.
Sec. 9.
Amendments to Executive Order 12656. Executive Order 12656 of November 18, 1988, as amended, is hereby further amended as follows:
(a) Section 101(a) is amended by adding at the end of the fourth sentence: “, except that the Homeland Security Council shall be responsible for administering such policy with respect to terrorist threats and attacks within the United States.”
(b) Section 104(a) is amended by adding at the end: “, except that the Homeland Security Council is the principal forum for consideration of policy relating to terrorist threats and attacks within the United States.”
(c) Section 104(b) is amended by inserting the words “and the Homeland Security Council” after the words “National Security Council.”
(d) The first sentence of section 104(c) is amended by inserting the words “and the Homeland Security Council” after the words “National Security Council.”
(e) The second sentence of section 104(c) is replaced with the following two sentences: “Pursuant to such procedures for the organization and management of the National Security Council and Homeland Security Council Start Printed Page 51817processes as the President may establish, the Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency also shall assist in the implementation of and management of those processes as the President may establish. The Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency also shall assist in the implementation of national security emergency preparedness policy by coordinating with the other Federal departments and agencies and with State and local governments, and by providing periodic reports to the National Security Council and the Homeland Security Council on implementation of national security emergency preparedness policy.”
(f) Section 201(7) is amended by inserting the words “and the Homeland Security Council” after the words “National Security Council.”
(g) Section 206 is amended by inserting the words “and the Homeland Security Council” after the words “National Security Council.”
(h) Section 208 is amended by inserting the words “or the Homeland Security Council” after the words “National Security Council.”
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 52013
Executive Order 13229 of October 9, 2001
Amendment to Executive Order 13045, Extending the Task Force on Environmental Health Risks and Safety Risks to Children
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to extend the Task Force on Environmental Health Risks and Safety Risks to Children, it is hereby ordered that Executive Order 13045 of April 21, 1997, is amended by deleting in section 3-306 of that order “for a period of 4 years from the first meeting” and inserting in lieu thereof “for 6 years from the date of this order”.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13230 of October 12, 2001
President's Advisory Commission on Educational Excellence for Hispanic Americans
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to advance the development of human potential, strengthen the Nation's capacity to provide high-quality education, and increase opportunities for Hispanic Americans to participate in and benefit from Federal education programs, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. There is established, in the Department of Education, the President's Advisory Commission on Educational Excellence for Hispanic Americans (Commission). The Commission shall consist of not more than 25 members. Twenty-one of the members shall be appointed by the President. Those members shall be representatives of educational, business, professional, and community organizations who are committed to improving educational attainment within the Hispanic community, as well as other persons deemed appropriate by the President. The President shall designate two of the appointed members to serve as Co-Chairs of the Commission. The other four members of the Commission shall be ex officio members, one each from the Department of Education, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the Department of the Treasury, and the Small Business Administration. The ex officio members shall be the respective Secretaries of those agencies and the Administrator of the Small Business Administration, or their designees.
Sec. 2. The Commission shall provide advice to the Secretary of Education (“Secretary”) and shall issue reports to the President, as described in section 7 below, concerning:
(a) the progress of Hispanic Americans in closing the academic achievement gap and attaining the goals established by the President's “No Child Left Behind” educational blueprint;
(b) the development, monitoring, and coordination of Federal efforts to promote high-quality education for Hispanic Americans;
(c) ways to increase parental, State and local, private sector, and community involvement in improving education; and
(d) ways to maximize the effectiveness of Federal education initiatives within the Hispanic community.
Sec. 3. There is established, in the Department of Education, an office called the White House Initiative on Educational Excellence for Hispanic Americans (Initiative). The Initiative shall be located at, staffed, and supported by the Department of Education, and headed by a Director, who shall be a senior level executive branch official who reports to the Secretary. The Initiative shall provide the necessary staff, resources, and assistance to the Commission and shall assist and advise the Secretary in carrying out his responsibilities under this order. The staff of the Initiative shall gather and disseminate information relating to the educational achievement gap of Hispanic Americans, using a variety of means, including conducting surveys, conferences, field hearings, and meetings, and other appropriate Start Printed Page 52842vehicles designed to encourage the participation of organizations and individuals interested in such issues, including parents, community leaders, academicians, business leaders, teachers, employers, employees and public officials at the local, State, and Federal levels. To the extent permitted by law, executive branch departments and agencies shall cooperate in providing resources, including personnel detailed to the Initiative, to meet the objectives of this order. The Initiative shall include both career civil service and appointed staff with expertise in the area of education.
Sec. 4. Executive branch departments and agencies, to the extent permitted by law and practicable, shall provide any appropriate information requested by the Commission or the staff of the Initiative, including data relating to the eligibility for and participation by Hispanic Americans in Federal education programs and the progress of Hispanic Americans in closing the academic achievement gap and in achieving the goals of the President's “No Child Left Behind” education blueprint. Where adequate data are not available, the Commission shall suggest the means for collecting the data. In accordance with the accountability goals established by the President, executive branch departments and agencies involved in relevant programs shall report to the President through the Initiative by September 30, 2002, on:
(a) efforts to increase participation of Hispanic Americans in Federal education programs and services;
(b) efforts to include Hispanic-serving school districts, Hispanic-serving institutions, and other educational institutions for Hispanic Americans in Federal education programs and services;
(c) levels of participation attained by Hispanic Americans in Federal education programs and services; and
(d) the measurable impact resulting from these efforts and levels of participation. The Department of Education's report also shall describe the overall condition of Hispanic American education and such other aspects of the educational status of Hispanic Americans, as the Secretary considers appropriate.
Sec. 5. Insofar as the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App), may apply to the Commission, any functions of the President under that Act, except that of reporting to the Congress, shall be performed by the Department of Education in accordance with the guidelines that have been issued by the Administrator of General Services.
Sec. 6. (a) Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, but shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in the Government service (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707).
(b) To the extent permitted by law, the Department of Education shall provide funding and administrative support for the Commission and the Initiative.
Sec. 7. The Commission shall prepare and submit an interim and final report to the President outlining its findings and recommendations as follows:
(a) The Commission shall submit an Interim Report no later than September 30, 2002. The Interim Report shall describe the Commission's examination of:
(i)
available research and information on the effectiveness of current practices at the local, State, and Federal levels in closing the educational achievement gap for Hispanic Americans and attaining the goals established by the President's “No Child Left Behind” educational blueprint;
(ii)
available research and information on the effectiveness of current practices involving Hispanic parents in the education of their children; andStart Printed Page 52843
(iii)
the appropriate role of Federal agencies' education programs in helping Hispanic parents successfully prepare their children to graduate from high school and attend post secondary institutions.
(b) The Commission shall issue a Final Report no later than March 31, 2003. The Final Report shall set forth the Commission's recommendations regarding:
(i)
a multi-year plan, based on the data collected concerning identification of barriers to and successful models for closing the educational achievement gap for Hispanic Americans, that provides for a coordinated effort among parents, community leaders, business leaders, educators, and public officials at the local, State, and Federal levels to close the educational achievement gap for Hispanic Americans and ensure attainment of the goals established by the President's “No Child Left Behind” educational blueprint.
(ii)
the development of a monitoring system that measures and holds executive branch departments and agencies accountable for the coordination of Federal efforts among the designated executive departments and agencies to ensure the participation of Hispanic Americans in Federal education programs and promote high-quality education for Hispanic Americans;
(iii)
the identification of successful methods employed throughout the Nation in increasing parental, State and local, private sector, and community involvement in improving education for Hispanic Americans;
(iv)
ways to improve on and measure the effectiveness of Federal agencies' education programs in ensuring that Hispanic Americans close the educational achievement gap and attain the goals established by the President's “No Child Left Behind” educational blueprint; and
(v)
how Federal Government education programs can best be applied to ensure Hispanic parents successfully prepare their children to attend post secondary institutions.
Sec. 8. The Commission shall terminate 30 days after submitting its final report, unless extended by the President.
Sec. 9. Executive Order 12900 of February 22, 1994, as amended, is revoked.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13231 of October 16, 2001
Critical Infrastructure Protection in the Information Age
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to ensure protection of information systems for critical infrastructure, including emergency preparedness communications, and the physical assets that support such systems, in the information age, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy.
(a) The information technology revolution has changed the way business is transacted, government operates, and national defense is conducted. Those three functions now depend on an interdependent network of critical information infrastructures. The protection program authorized by this order shall consist of continuous efforts to secure information systems for critical infrastructure, including emergency preparedness communications, and the physical assets that support such systems. Protection of these systems is essential to the telecommunications, energy, financial services, manufacturing, water, transportation, health care, and emergency services sectors.
(b) It is the policy of the United States to protect against disruption of the operation of information systems for critical infrastructure and thereby help to protect the people, economy, essential human and government services, and national security of the United States, and to ensure that any disruptions that occur are infrequent, of minimal duration, and manageable, and cause the least damage possible. The implementation of this policy shall include a voluntary public-private partnership, involving corporate and nongovernmental organizations.
Sec. 2.
Scope. To achieve this policy, there shall be a senior executive branch board to coordinate and have cognizance of Federal efforts and programs that relate to protection of information systems and involve:
(a) cooperation with and protection of private sector critical infrastructure, State and local governments' critical infrastructure, and supporting programs in corporate and academic organizations;
(b) protection of Federal departments' and agencies' critical infrastructure; and
(c) related national security programs.
Sec. 3.
Establishment. I hereby establish the “President's Critical Infrastructure Protection Board” (the “Board”).
Sec. 4.
Continuing Authorities. This order does not alter the existing authorities or roles of United States Government departments and agencies. Authorities set forth in 44 U.S.C. Chapter 35, and other applicable law, provide senior officials with responsibility for the security of Federal Government information systems.
(a)
Executive Branch Information Systems Security. The Director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) has the responsibility to develop and oversee the implementation of government-wide policies, principles, standards, and guidelines for the security of information systems that support the executive branch departments and agencies, except those noted in section 4(b) of this order. The Director of OMB shall advise the President and the appropriate department or agency head when there is a critical deficiency in the security practices within the purview of this section in an executive branch department or agency. The Board shall assist and support the Director Start Printed Page 53064of OMB in this function and shall be reasonably cognizant of programs related to security of department and agency information systems.
(b)
National Security Information Systems. The Secretary of Defense and the Director of Central Intelligence (DCI) shall have responsibility to oversee, develop, and ensure implementation of policies, principles, standards, and guidelines for the security of information systems that support the operations under their respective control. In consultation with the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs and the affected departments and agencies, the Secretary of Defense and the DCI shall develop policies, principles, standards, and guidelines for the security of national security information systems that support the operations of other executive branch departments and agencies with national security information.
(i)
Policies, principles, standards, and guidelines developed under this subsection may require more stringent protection than those developed in accordance with subsection 4(a) of this order.
(ii)
The Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs shall advise the President and the appropriate department or agency head when there is a critical deficiency in the security practices of a department or agency within the purview of this section. The Board, or one of its standing or ad hoc committees, shall be reasonably cognizant of programs to provide security and continuity to national security information systems.
(c)
Additional Responsibilities: The Heads of Executive Branch Departments and Agencies. The heads of executive branch departments and agencies are responsible and accountable for providing and maintaining adequate levels of security for information systems, including emergency preparedness communications systems, for programs under their control. Heads of such departments and agencies shall ensure the development and, within available appropriations, funding of programs that adequately address these mission areas. Cost-effective security shall be built into and made an integral part of government information systems, especially those critical systems that support the national security and other essential government programs. Additionally, security should enable, and not unnecessarily impede, department and agency business operations.
Sec. 5.
Board Responsibilities. Consistent with the responsibilities noted in section 4 of this order, the Board shall recommend policies and coordinate programs for protecting information systems for critical infrastructure, including emergency preparedness communications, and the physical assets that support such systems. Among its activities to implement these responsibilities, the Board shall:
(a)
Outreach to the Private Sector and State and Local Governments. In consultation with affected executive branch departments and agencies, coordinate outreach to and consultation with the private sector, including corporations that own, operate, develop, and equip information, telecommunications, transportation, energy, water, health care, and financial services, on protection of information systems for critical infrastructure, including emergency preparedness communications, and the physical assets that support such systems; and coordinate outreach to State and local governments, as well as communities and representatives from academia and other relevant elements of society.
(i)
When requested to do so, assist in the development of voluntary standards and best practices in a manner consistent with 15 U.S.C. Chapter 7;
(ii)
Consult with potentially affected communities, including the legal, auditing, financial, and insurance communities, to the extent permitted by law, to determine areas of mutual concern; andStart Printed Page 53065
(iii)
Coordinate the activities of senior liaison officers appointed by the Attorney General, the Secretaries of Energy, Commerce, Transportation, the Treasury, and Health and Human Services, and the Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency for outreach on critical infrastructure protection issues with private sector organizations within the areas of concern to these departments and agencies. In these and other related functions, the Board shall work in coordination with the Critical Infrastructure Assurance Office (CIAO) and the National Institute of Standards and Technology of the Department of Commerce, the National Infrastructure Protection Center (NIPC), and the National Communications System (NCS).
(b)
Information Sharing. Work with industry, State and local governments, and nongovernmental organizations to ensure that systems are created and well managed to share threat warning, analysis, and recovery information among government network operation centers, information sharing and analysis centers established on a voluntary basis by industry, and other related operations centers. In this and other related functions, the Board shall work in coordination with the NCS, the Federal Computer Incident Response Center, the NIPC, and other departments and agencies, as appropriate.
(c)
Incident Coordination and Crisis Response. Coordinate programs and policies for responding to information systems security incidents that threaten information systems for critical infrastructure, including emergency preparedness communications, and the physical assets that support such systems. In this function, the Department of Justice, through the NIPC and the Manager of the NCS and other departments and agencies, as appropriate, shall work in coordination with the Board.
(d) Recruitment, Retention, and Training Executive Branch Security Professionals. In consultation with executive branch departments and agencies, coordinate programs to ensure that government employees with responsibilities for protecting information systems for critical infrastructure, including emergency preparedness communications, and the physical assets that support such systems, are adequately trained and evaluated. In this function, the Office of Personnel Management shall work in coordination with the Board, as appropriate.
(e) Research and Development. Coordinate with the Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) on a program of Federal Government research and development for protection of information systems for critical infrastructure, including emergency preparedness communications, and the physical assets that support such systems, and ensure coordination of government activities in this field with corporations, universities, Federally funded research centers, and national laboratories. In this function, the Board shall work in coordination with the National Science Foundation, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, and with other departments and agencies, as appropriate.
(f) Law Enforcement Coordination with National Security Components. Promote programs against cyber crime and assist Federal law enforcement agencies in gaining necessary cooperation from executive branch departments and agencies. Support Federal law enforcement agencies' investigation of illegal activities involving information systems for critical infrastructure, including emergency preparedness communications, and the physical assets that support such systems, and support coordination by these agencies with other departments and agencies with responsibilities to defend the Nation's security. In this function, the Board shall work in coordination with the Department of Justice, through the NIPC, and the Department of the Treasury, through the Secret Service, and with other departments and agencies, as appropriate.
(g) International Information Infrastructure Protection. Support the Department of State's coordination of United States Government programs for international cooperation covering international information infrastructure protection issues.Start Printed Page 53066
(h)
Legislation. In accordance with OMB circular A-19, advise departments and agencies, the Director of OMB, and the Assistant to the President for Legislative Affairs on legislation relating to protection of information systems for critical infrastructure, including emergency preparedness communications, and the physical assets that support such systems.
(i)
Coordination with Office of Homeland Security. Carry out those functions relating to protection of and recovery from attacks against information systems for critical infrastructure, including emergency preparedness communications, that were assigned to the Office of Homeland Security by Executive Order 13228 of October 8, 2001. The Assistant to the President for Homeland Security, in coordination with the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, shall be responsible for defining the responsibilities of the Board in coordinating efforts to protect physical assets that support information systems.
Sec. 6.
Membership. (a) Members of the Board shall be drawn from the executive branch departments, agencies, and offices listed below; in addition, concerned Federal departments and agencies may participate in the activities of appropriate committees of the Board. The Board shall be led by a Chair and Vice Chair, designated by the President. Its other members shall be the following senior officials or their designees:
(i) Secretary of State;
(ii) Secretary of the Treasury;
(iii) Secretary of Defense;
(iv) Attorney General;
(v) Secretary of Commerce;
(vi) Secretary of Health and Human Services;
(vii) Secretary of Transportation;
(viii) Secretary of Energy;
(ix) Director of Central Intelligence;
(x) Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff;
(xi) Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
(xii) Administrator of General Services;
(xiii) Director of the Office of Management and Budget;
(xiv) Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy;
(xv) Chief of Staff to the Vice President;
(xvi) Director of the National Economic Council;
(xvii) Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs;
(xviii) Assistant to the President for Homeland Security;
(xix) Chief of Staff to the President; and
(xx) Such other executive branch officials as the President may designate.
Members of the Board and their designees shall be full-time or permanent part-time officers or employees of the Federal Government.
(b) In addition, the following officials shall serve as members of the Board and shall form the Board's Coordination Committee:
(i)
Director, Critical Infrastructure Assurance Office, Department of Commerce;
(ii)
Manager, National Communications System;
(iii)
Vice Chair, Chief Information Officers' (CIO) Council;
(iv)
Information Assurance Director, National Security Agency;
(v)
Deputy Director of Central Intelligence for Community Management; and
(vi)
Director, National Infrastructure Protection Center, Federal Bureau of Investigation, Department of Justice.Start Printed Page 53067
(c) The Chairman of the Federal Communications Commission may appoint a representative to the Board.
Sec. 7.
Chair. (a) The Chair also shall be the Special Advisor to the President for Cyberspace Security. Executive branch departments and agencies shall make all reasonable efforts to keep the Chair fully informed in a timely manner, and to the greatest extent permitted by law, of all programs and issues within the purview of the Board. The Chair, in consultation with the Board, shall call and preside at meetings of the Board and set the agenda for the Board. The Chair, in consultation with the Board, may propose policies and programs to appropriate officials to ensure the protection of the Nation's information systems for critical infrastructure, including emergency preparedness communications, and the physical assets that support such systems. To ensure full coordination between the responsibilities of the National Security Council (NSC) and the Office of Homeland Security, the Chair shall report to both the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs and to the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security. The Chair shall coordinate with the Assistant to the President for Economic Policy on issues relating to private sector systems and economic effects and with the Director of OMB on issues relating to budgets and the security of computer networks addressed in subsection 4(a) of this order.
(b) The Chair shall be assisted by an appropriately sized staff within the White House Office. In addition, heads of executive branch departments and agencies are authorized, to the extent permitted by law, to detail or assign personnel of such departments and agencies to the Board's staff upon request of the Chair, subject to the approval of the Chief of Staff to the President. Members of the Board's staff with responsibilities relating to national security information systems, communications, and information warfare may, with respect to those responsibilities, also work at the direction of the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs.
Sec. 8.
Standing Committees. (a) The Board may establish standing and ad hoc committees as appropriate. Representation on standing committees shall not be limited to those departments and agencies on the Board, but may include representatives of other concerned executive branch departments and agencies.
(b) Chairs of standing and ad hoc committees shall report fully and regularly on the activities of the committees to the Board, which shall ensure that the committees are well coordinated with each other.
(c) There are established the following standing committees:
(i)
Private Sector and State and Local Government Outreach, chaired by the designee of the Secretary of Commerce, to work in coordination with the designee of the Chairman of the National Economic Council.
(ii)
Executive Branch Information Systems Security, chaired by the designee of the Director of OMB. The committee shall assist OMB in fulfilling its responsibilities under 44 U.S.C. Chapter 35 and other applicable law.
(iii)
National Security Systems. The National Security Telecommunications and Information Systems Security Committee, as established by and consistent with NSD-42 and chaired by the Department of Defense, shall serve as a Board standing committee, and be redesignated the Committee on National Security Systems.
(iv)
Incident Response Coordination, co-chaired by the designees of the Attorney General and the Secretary of Defense.
(v)
Research and Development, chaired by a designee of the Director of OSTP.Start Printed Page 53068
(vi)
National Security and Emergency Preparedness Communications. The NCS Committee of Principals is renamed the Board's Committee for National Security and Emergency Preparedness Communications. The reporting functions established above for standing committees are in addition to the functions set forth in Executive Order 12472 of April 3, 1984, and do not alter any function or role set forth therein.
(vii)
Physical Security, co-chaired by the designees of the Secretary of Defense and the Attorney General, to coordinate programs to ensure the physical security of information systems for critical infrastructure, including emergency preparedness communications, and the physical assets that support such systems. The standing committee shall coordinate its work with the Office of Homeland Security and shall work closely with the Physical Security Working Group of the Records Access and Information Security Policy Coordinating Committee to ensure coordination of efforts.
(viii)
Infrastructure Interdependencies, co-chaired by the designees of the Secretaries of Transportation and Energy, to coordinate programs to assess the unique risks, threats, and vulnerabilities associated with the interdependency of information systems for critical infrastructures, including the development of effective models, simulations, and other analytic tools and cost-effective technologies in this area.
(ix)
International Affairs, chaired by a designee of the Secretary of State, to support Department of State coordination of United States Government programs for international cooperation covering international information infrastructure issues.
(x)
Financial and Banking Information Infrastructure, chaired by a designee of the Secretary of the Treasury and including representatives of the banking and financial institution regulatory agencies.
(xi)
Other Committees. Such other standing committees as may be established by the Board.
(d)
Subcommittees. The chair of each standing committee may form necessary subcommittees with organizational representation as determined by the Chair.
(e) Streamlining. The Board shall develop procedures that specify the manner in which it or a subordinate committee will perform the responsibilities previously assigned to the Policy Coordinating Committee. The Board, in coordination with the Director of OSTP, shall review the functions of the Joint Telecommunications Resources Board, established under Executive Order 12472, and make recommendations about its future role.
Sec. 9.
Planning and Budget. (a) The Board, on a periodic basis, shall propose a National Plan or plans for subjects within its purview. The Board, in coordination with the Office of Homeland Security, also shall make recommendations to OMB on those portions of executive branch department and agency budgets that fall within the Board's purview, after review of relevant program requirements and resources.
(b) The Office of Administration within the Executive Office of the President shall provide the Board with such personnel, funding, and administrative support, to the extent permitted by law and subject to the availability of appropriations, as directed by the Chief of Staff to carry out the provisions of this order. Only those funds that are available for the Office of Homeland Security, established by Executive Order 13228, shall be available for such purposes. To the extent permitted by law and as appropriate, agencies represented on the Board also may provide administrative support for the Board. The National Security Agency shall ensure that the Board's information and communications systems are appropriately secured.
(c) The Board may annually request the National Science Foundation, Department of Energy, Department of Transportation, Environmental Protection Agency, Department of Commerce, Department of Defense, and the Intelligence Community, as that term is defined in Executive Order 12333 Start Printed Page 53069of December 4, 1981, to include in their budget requests to OMB funding for demonstration projects and research to support the Board's activities.
Sec. 10.
Presidential Advisory Panels. The Chair shall work closely with panels of senior experts from outside of the government that advise the President, in particular: the President's National Security Telecommunications Advisory Committee (NSTAC) created by Executive Order 12382 of September 13, 1982, as amended, and the National Infrastructure Advisory Council (NIAC or Council) created by this Executive Order. The Chair and Vice Chair of these two panels also may meet with the Board, as appropriate and to the extent permitted by law, to provide a private sector perspective.
(a) NSTAC. The NSTAC provides the President advice on the security and continuity of communications systems essential for national security and emergency preparedness.
(b) NIAC. There is hereby established the National Infrastructure Advisory Council, which shall provide the President advice on the security of information systems for critical infrastructure supporting other sectors of the economy: banking and finance, transportation, energy, manufacturing, and emergency government services. The NIAC shall be composed of not more than 30 members appointed by the President. The members of the NIAC shall be selected from the private sector, academia, and State and local government. Members of the NIAC shall have expertise relevant to the functions of the NIAC and generally shall be selected from industry Chief Executive Officers (and equivalently ranked leaders in other organizations) with responsibilities for the security of information infrastructure supporting the critical sectors of the economy, including banking and finance, transportation, energy, communications, and emergency government services. Members shall not be full-time officials or employees of the executive branch of the Federal Government.
(i)
The President shall designate a Chair and Vice Chair from among the members of the NIAC.
(ii)
The Chair of the Board established by this order will serve as the Executive Director of the NIAC.
(c)
NIAC Functions. The NIAC will meet periodically to:
(i)
enhance the partnership of the public and private sectors in protecting information systems for critical infrastructures and provide reports on this issue to the President, as appropriate;
(ii)
propose and develop ways to encourage private industry to perform periodic risk assessments of critical information and telecommunications systems;
(iii)
monitor the development of private sector Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs) and provide recommendations to the Board on how these organizations can best foster improved cooperation among the ISACs, the NIPC, and other Federal Government entities;
(iv)
report to the President through the Board, which shall ensure appropriate coordination with the Assistant to the President for Economic Policy under the terms of this order; and
(v)
advise lead agencies with critical infrastructure responsibilities, sector coordinators, the NIPC, the ISACs, and the Board.
(d)
Administration of the NIAC.
(i)
The NIAC may hold hearings, conduct inquiries, and establish subcommittees, as appropriate.
(ii)
Upon the request of the Chair, and to the extent permitted by law, the heads of the executive branch departments and agencies shall provide the Council with information and advice relating to its functions.
(iii)
Senior Federal Government officials may participate in the meetings of the NIAC, as appropriate.Start Printed Page 53070
(iv)
Members shall serve without compensation for their work on the Council. However, members may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in Federal Government service (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707).
(v)
To the extent permitted by law, and subject to the availability of appropriations, the Department of Commerce, through the CIAO, shall provide the NIAC with administrative services, staff, and other support services and such funds as may be necessary for the performance of the NIAC's functions.
(e) General Provisions.
(i)
Insofar as the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.), may apply to the NIAC, the functions of the President under that Act, except that of reporting to the Congress, shall be performed by the Department of Commerce in accordance with the guidelines and procedures established by the Administrator of General Services.
(ii)
The Council shall terminate 2 years from the date of this order, unless extended by the President prior to that date.
(iii)
Executive Order 13130 of July 14, 1999, is hereby revoked.
Sec. 11.
National Communications System. Changes in technology are causing the convergence of much of telephony, data relay, and internet communications networks into an interconnected network of networks. The NCS and its National Coordinating Center shall support use of telephony, converged information, voice networks, and next generation networks for emergency preparedness and national security communications functions assigned to them in Executive Order 12472. All authorities and assignments of responsibilities to departments and agencies in that order, including the role of the Manager of NCS, remain unchanged except as explicitly modified by this order.
Sec. 12.
Counter-intelligence. The Board shall coordinate its activities with those of the Office of the Counter-intelligence Executive to address the threat to programs within the Board's purview from hostile foreign intelligence services.
Sec. 13.
Classification Authority. I hereby delegate to the Chair the authority to classify information originally as Top Secret, in accordance with Executive Order 12958 of April 17, 1995, as amended, or any successor Executive Order.
Sec. 14.
General Provisions.
(a) Nothing in this order shall supersede any requirement made by or under law.Start Printed Page 53071
(b) This order does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity, against the United States, its departments, agencies or other entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13232 of October 20, 2001
Further Amendment to Executive Order 10789, as Amended, To Authorize the Department of Health and Human Services To Exercise Certain Contracting Authority in Connection With National Defense Functions
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including 50 U.S.C. 1431-35, and in order to authorize the Department of Health and Human Services to exercise certain contracting authority in connection with national defense functions, it is hereby ordered that Executive Order 10789 of November 14, 1958, as amended, is further amended by inserting the words “Department of Health and Human Services” in the list of departments and agencies in section 21 of that order after the words “Department of Commerce.”
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13233 of November 1, 2001
Further Implementation of the Presidential Records Act
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to establish policies and procedures implementing section 2204 of title 44 of the United States Code with respect to constitutionally based privileges, including those that apply to Presidential records reflecting military, diplomatic, or national security secrets, Presidential communications, legal advice, legal work, or the deliberative processes of the President and the President's advisors, and to do so in a manner consistent with the Supreme Court's decisions in Nixon v. Administrator of General Services, 433 U.S. 425 (1977), and other cases, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Definitions.
For purposes of this order:
(a) “Archivist” refers to the Archivist of the United States or his designee.
(b) “Presidential records” refers to those documentary materials maintained by the National Archives and Records Administration pursuant to the Presidential Records Act, 44 U.S.C. 2201-2207.
(c) “Former President” refers to the former President during whose term or terms of office particular Presidential records were created.
Sec. 2.
Constitutional and Legal Background.
(a) For a period not to exceed 12 years after the conclusion of a Presidency, the Archivist administers records in accordance with the limitations on access imposed by section 2204 of title 44. After expiration of that period, section 2204(c) of title 44 directs that the Archivist administer Presidential records in accordance with section 552 of title 5, the Freedom of Information Act, including by withholding, as appropriate, records subject to exemptions (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7), (b)(8), and (b)(9) of section 552. Section 2204(c)(1) of title 44 provides that exemption (b)(5) of section 552 is not available to the Archivist as a basis for withholding records, but section 2204(c)(2) recognizes that the former President or the incumbent President may assert any constitutionally based privileges, including those ordinarily encompassed within exemption (b)(5) of section 552. The President's constitutionally based privileges subsume privileges for records that reflect: military, diplomatic, or national security secrets (the state secrets privilege); communications of the President or his advisors (the presidential communications privilege); legal advice or legal work (the attorney-client or attorney work product privileges); and the deliberative processes of the President or his advisors (the deliberative process privilege).
(b) In Nixon v. Administrator of General Services, the Supreme Court set forth the constitutional basis for the President's privileges for confidential communications: “Unless [the President] can give his advisers some assurance of confidentiality, a President could not expect to receive the full and frank submissions of facts and opinions upon which effective discharge of his duties depends.” 433 U.S. at 448-49. The Court cited the precedent of the Constitutional Convention, the records of which were “sealed for more than 30 years after the Convention.” Id. at 447 n.11. Based on those precedents and principles, the Court ruled that constitutionally based privileges available to a President “survive[] the individual President's tenure.”Id. at 449. The Court also held that a former President, although no longer Start Printed Page 56026a Government official, may assert constitutionally based privileges with respect to his Administration's Presidential records, and expressly rejected the argument that “only an incumbent President can assert the privilege of the Presidency.” Id. at 448.
(c) The Supreme Court has held that a party seeking to overcome the constitutionally based privileges that apply to Presidential records must establish at least a “demonstrated, specific need” for particular records, a standard that turns on the nature of the proceeding and the importance of the information to that proceeding. See United States v. Nixon, 418 U.S. 683, 713 (1974). Notwithstanding the constitutionally based privileges that apply to Presidential records, many former Presidents have authorized access, after what they considered an appropriate period of repose, to those records or categories of records (including otherwise privileged records) to which the former Presidents or their representatives in their discretion decided to authorize access. See Nixon v. Administrator of General Services, 433 U.S. at 450-51.
Sec. 3.
Procedure for Administering Privileged Presidential Records.
Consistent with the requirements of the Constitution and the Presidential Records Act, the Archivist shall administer Presidential records under section 2204(c) of title 44 in the following manner:
(a) At an appropriate time after the Archivist receives a request for access to Presidential records under section 2204(c)(1), the Archivist shall provide notice to the former President and the incumbent President and, as soon as practicable, shall provide the former President and the incumbent President copies of any records that the former President and the incumbent President request to review.
(b) After receiving the records he requests, the former President shall review those records as expeditiously as possible, and for no longer than 90 days for requests that are not unduly burdensome. The Archivist shall not permit access to the records by a requester during this period of review or when requested by the former President to extend the time for review.
(c) After review of the records in question, or of any other potentially privileged records reviewed by the former President, the former President shall indicate to the Archivist whether the former President requests withholding of or authorizes access to any privileged records.
(d) Concurrent with or after the former President's review of the records, the incumbent President or his designee may also review the records in question, or may utilize whatever other procedures the incumbent President deems appropriate to decide whether to concur in the former President's decision to request withholding of or authorize access to the records.
(1) When the former President has requested withholding of the records:
(i)
If under the standard set forth in section 4 below, the incumbent President concurs in the former President's decision to request withholding of records as privileged, the incumbent President shall so inform the former President and the Archivist. The Archivist shall not permit access to those records by a requester unless and until the incumbent President advises the Archivist that the former President and the incumbent President agree to authorize access to the records or until so ordered by a final and nonappealable court order.Start Printed Page 56027
(ii)
If under the standard set forth in section 4 below, the incumbent President does not concur in the former President's decision to request withholding of the records as privileged, the incumbent President shall so inform the former President and the Archivist. Because the former President independently retains the right to assert constitutionally based privileges, the Archivist shall not permit access to the records by a requester unless and until the incumbent President advises the Archivist that the former President and the incumbent President agree to authorize access to the records or until so ordered by a final and nonappealable court order.
(2) When the former President has authorized access to the records:
(i)
If under the standard set forth in section 4 below, the incumbent President concurs in the former President's decision to authorize access to the records, the Archivist shall permit access to the records by the requester.
(ii)
If under the standard set forth in section 4 below, the incumbent President does not concur in the former President's decision to authorize access to the records, the incumbent President may independently order the Archivist to withhold privileged records. In that instance, the Archivist shall not permit access to the records by a requester unless and until the incumbent President advises the Archivist that the former President and the incumbent President agree to authorize access to the records or until so ordered by a final and nonappealable court order.
Sec. 4.
Concurrence by Incumbent President.
Absent compelling circumstances, the incumbent President will concur in the privilege decision of the former President in response to a request for access under section 2204(c)(1). When the incumbent President concurs in the decision of the former President to request withholding of records within the scope of a constitutionally based privilege, the incumbent President will support that privilege claim in any forum in which the privilege claim is challenged.
Sec. 5.
Incumbent President's Right to Obtain Access.
This order does not expand or limit the incumbent President's right to obtain access to the records of a former President pursuant to section 2205(2)(B).
Sec. 6.
Right of Congress and Courts to Obtain Access.
This order does not expand or limit the rights of a court, House of Congress, or authorized committee or subcommittee of Congress to obtain access to the records of a former President pursuant to section 2205(2)(A) or section 2205(2)(C). With respect to such requests, the former President shall review the records in question and, within 21 days of receiving notice from the Archivist, indicate to the Archivist his decision with respect to any privilege. The incumbent President shall indicate his decision with respect to any privilege within 21 days after the former President has indicated his decision. Those periods may be extended by the former President or the incumbent President for requests that are burdensome. The Archivist shall not permit access to the records unless and until the incumbent President advises the Archivist that the former President and the incumbent President agree to authorize access to the records or until so ordered by a final and nonappealable court order.
Sec. 7.
No Effect on Right to Withhold Records.
This order does not limit the former President's or the incumbent President's right to withhold records on any ground supplied by the Constitution, statute, or regulation.
Sec. 8.
Withholding of Privileged Records During 12-Year Period.
Start Printed Page 56028
In the period not to exceed 12 years after the conclusion of a Presidency during which section 2204(a) and section 2204(b) of title 44 apply, a former President or the incumbent President may request withholding of any privileged records not already protected from disclosure under section 2204. If the former President or the incumbent President so requests, the Archivist shall not permit access to any such privileged records unless and until the incumbent President advises the Archivist that the former President and the incumbent President agree to authorize access to the records or until so ordered by a final and nonappealable court order.
Sec. 9.
Establishment of Procedures.
This order is not intended to indicate whether and under what circumstances a former President should assert or waive any privilege. The order is intended to establish procedures for former and incumbent Presidents to make privilege determinations.
Sec. 10.
Designation of Representative.
The former President may designate a representative (or series or group of alternative representatives, as the former President in his discretion may determine) to act on his behalf for purposes of the Presidential Records Act and this order. Upon the death or disability of a former President, the former President's designated representative shall act on his behalf for purposes of the Act and this order, including with respect to the assertion of constitutionally based privileges. In the absence of any designated representative after the former President's death or disability, the family of the former President may designate a representative (or series or group of alternative representatives, as they in their discre tion may determine) to act on the former President's behalf for purposes of the Act and this order, including with respect to the assertion of constitutionally based privileges.
Sec. 11.
Vice Presidential Records.
(a) Pursuant to section 2207 of title 44 of the United States Code, the Presidential Records Act applies to the executive records of the Vice President. Subject to subsections (b) and (c), this order shall also apply with respect to any such records that are subject to any constitutionally based privilege that the former Vice President may be entitled to invoke, but in the administration of this order with respect to such records, references in this order to a former President shall be deemed also to be references to the relevant former Vice President.
(b) Subsection (a) shall not be deemed to authorize a Vice President or former Vice President to invoke any constitutional privilege of a President or former President except as authorized by that President or former President.
(c) Nothing in this section shall be construed to grant, limit, or otherwise affect any privilege of a President, Vice President, former President, or former Vice President.
Sec. 12.
Judicial Review.
This order is intended to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by a party, other than a former President or his designated representative, against the United States, its agencies, its officers, or any person.
Start Printed Page 56029
Sec. 13.
Revocation.
Executive Order 12667 of January 18, 1989, is revoked.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13234 of November 9, 2001
Presidential Task Force on Citizen Preparedness in the War on Terrorism
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to support and enhance the efforts of the American public with respect to preparedness and volunteerism in the war on terrorism, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment. There is hereby established the “Presidential Task Force on Citizen Preparedness in the War On Terrorism” (Task Force).
Sec. 2.
Membership. (a) The Task Force shall be composed of the heads of the following executive branch entities, who may designate representatives from within their respective entities to assist them in their duties in connection with the Task Force: the Office of the Vice President, the Office of Homeland Security, the Domestic Policy Council, the Office of Science and Technology Policy, the Office of Management and Budget, the Department of the Treasury, the Department of Justice, the Department of Labor, the Department of Health and Human Services, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the Department of Transportation, the Department of Energy, the Department of Veterans Affairs, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and the Corporation for National and Community Service. The heads of other executive branch departments and agencies and other senior executive branch officials may participate in the work of the Task Force upon the invitation of the Co-Chairs.
(b) The heads of the Office of Homeland Security and the Domestic Policy Council, or their designated representatives, shall serve as Co-Chairs of the Task Force.
Sec. 3.
Mission. The Task Force shall identify, review, and recommend appropriate means by which the American public can:
(a) prepare in their homes, neighborhoods, schools, places of worship, workplaces, and public places for the potential consequences of any possible terrorist attacks within the United States; and
(b) volunteer to assist or otherwise support State and local public health and safety officials and others engaged in the effort to prevent, prepare for, and respond to any possible terrorist attacks within the United States.
Sec. 4.
Reporting Requirement. The Task Force shall submit its recommendations to the President within 40 days from the date of this order.Start Printed Page 57356
Sec. 5.
Termination of Task Force. The Task Force shall terminate 30 days after submitting its report to the President.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13235 of November 16, 2001
National Emergency Construction Authority
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, I declared a national emergency that requires the use of the Armed Forces of the United States, by Proclamation 7463 of September 14, 2001, because of the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, and because of the continuing and immediate threat to the national security of the United States of further terrorist attacks. To provide additional authority to the Department of Defense to respond to that threat, and in accordance with section 301 of the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1631), I hereby order that the emergency construction authority at 10 U.S.C. 2808 is invoked and made available in accordance with its terms to the Secretary of Defense and, at the discretion of the Secretary of Defense, to the Secretaries of the military departments.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13236 of November 27, 2001
Waiver of Dual Compensation Provisions of the Central Intelligence Agency Retirement Act of 1964
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 292 of the Central Intelligence Agency Retirement Act of 1964, as amended (50 U.S.C. 2141), and in order to conform the Central Intelligence Agency Retirement and Disability System to the Civil Service Retirement and Disability System, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. The Director of Central Intelligence may waive the application of the dual compensation reduction provisions of sections 271 and 273 of the Central Intelligence Agency Retirement Act (50 U.S.C. 2111 and 2113) for an employee serving on a temporary basis, but only if, and for so long as, the authority is necessary due to an emergency involving a direct threat to life or property or other unusual circumstances. Employees who receive both salary and annuity pursuant to this authority may not earn additional retirement benefits during this period of employment. This authority may be delegated as appropriate.
Sec. 2. Nothing contained in this order is intended to create, nor does it create, any right, benefit, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by a party against the United States, its agencies, officers, employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13237 of November 28, 2001
Creation of the President's Council on Bioethics
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment. There is established the President's Council on Bioethics (the “Council”).
Sec. 2.
Mission.
(a) The Council shall advise the President on bioethical issues that may emerge as a consequence of advances in biomedical science and technology. In connection with its advisory role, the mission of the Council includes the following functions:
(1) to undertake fundamental inquiry into the human and moral significance of developments in biomedical and behavioral science and technology;
(2) to explore specific ethical and policy questions related to these developments;
(3) to provide a forum for a national discussion of bioethical issues;
(4) to facilitate a greater understanding of bioethical issues; and
(5) to explore possibilities for useful international collaboration on bioethical issues.
(b) In support of its mission, the Council may study ethical issues connected with specific technological activities, such as embryo and stem cell research, assisted reproduction, cloning, uses of knowledge and techniques derived from human genetics or the neurosciences, and end of life issues. The Council may also study broader ethical and social issues not tied to a specific technology, such as questions regarding the protection of human subjects in research, the appropriate uses of biomedical technologies, the moral implications of biomedical technologies, and the consequences of limiting scientific research.
(c) The Council shall strive to develop a deep and comprehensive understanding of the issues that it considers. In pursuit of this goal, the Council shall be guided by the need to articulate fully the complex and often competing moral positions on any given issue, rather than by an overriding concern to find consensus. The Council may therefore choose to proceed by offering a variety of views on a particular issue, rather than attempt to reach a single consensus position.
(d) The Council shall not be responsible for the review and approval of specific projects or for devising and overseeing regulations for specific government agencies.
(e) In support of its mission, the Council may accept suggestions of issues for consideration from the heads of other Government agencies and other sources, as it deems appropriate.
(f) In establishing priorities for its activities, the Council shall consider the urgency and gravity of the particular issue; the need for policy guidance and public education on the particular issue; the connection of the bioethical issue to the goal of Federal advancement of science and technology; and the existence of another entity available to deliberate appropriately on the bioethical issue.Start Printed Page 59852
Sec. 3.
Membership.
(a) The Council shall be composed of not more than 18 members appointed by the President from among individuals who are not officers or employees of the Federal Government. The Council shall include members drawn from the fields of science and medicine, law and government, philosophy and theology, and other areas of the humanities and social sciences.
(b) The President shall designate a member of the Council to serve as Chairperson.
(c) The term of office of a member shall be 2 years, and members shall be eligible for reappointment. Members may continue to serve after the expiration of their terms until the President appoints a successor. A member appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve only for the unexpired term of such vacancy.
Sec. 4.
Administration.
(a) Upon the request of the Chairperson, the heads of executive departments and agencies shall, to the extent permitted by law, provide the Council with information it needs for purposes of carrying out its functions.
(b) The Council may conduct inquiries, hold hearings, and establish subcommittees, as necessary.
(c) The Council is authorized to conduct analyses and develop reports or other materials.
(d) Members of the Council may be compensated to the extent permitted by Federal law for their work on the Council. Members may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in Government service (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707), to the extent funds are available.
(e) To the extent permitted by law, and subject to the availability of appropriations, the Department of Health and Human Services shall provide the Council with administrative support and with such funds as may be necessary for the performance of the Council's functions.
(f) The Council shall have a staff headed by an Executive Director, who shall be appointed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services in consultation with the Chairperson. To the extent permitted by law, office space, analytical support, and additional staff support for the Council shall be provided by the Department of Health and Human Services or other executive branch departments and agencies as directed by the President.
Sec. 5.
General Provisions.
(a) Insofar as the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.), may apply to the Council, any functions of the President under that Act, except that of reporting to the Congress, shall be performed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services in accordance with the guidelines that have been issued by the Administrator of General Services.
(b) The Council shall terminate 2 years from the date of this order unless extended by the President prior to that date.
Start Printed Page 59853
(c) This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and it is not intended to create any right, benefit, trust, or responsibility, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity by a party against the United States, its agencies, its officers, or any person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13238 of December 5, 2001
Closing of Federal Government Executive Departments and Agencies on Monday, December 24, 2001
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. All executive branch departments and agencies of the Federal Government shall be closed and their employees excused from duty on Monday, December 24, 2001, the day before Christmas Day, except as provided in section 2 below.
Sec. 2. The heads of executive branch departments and agencies may determine that certain offices and installations of their organizations, or parts thereof, must remain open and that certain employees must report for duty on December 24, 2001, for reasons of national security or defense or other public reasons.
Sec. 3. Monday, December 24, 2001, shall be considered as falling within the scope of Executive Order 11582 of February 11, 1971, and of 5 U.S.C. 5546 and 6103(b) and other similar statutes insofar as they relate to the pay and leave of employees of the United States.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13239 of December 12, 2001
Designation of Afghanistan and the Airspace Above as a Combat Zone
Pursuant to the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 112 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 112), I designate, for purposes of that section, Afghanistan, including the airspace above, as an area in which Armed Forces of the United States are and have been engaged in combat.
For purposes of this order, I designate September 19, 2001, as the date of the commencement of combatant activities in such zone.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13240 of December 18, 2001
Council of Europe in Respect of the Group of States Against Corruption
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, including section 1 of the International Organizations Immunities Act (22 U.S.C. 288) (the “Act”), and having found that the Council of Europe in Respect of the Group of States Against Corruption (GRECO) is a public international organization in which the United States participates within the meaning of the Act, I hereby designate GRECO as a public international organization entitled to enjoy the privileges, exemptions, and immunities conferred by the Act. This designation is not intended to abridge in any respect privileges, exemptions, or immunities that such organization may have acquired or may acquire by international agreement or by law.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 66258
Executive Order 13241 of December 18, 2001
Providing an Order of Succession Within the Department of Agriculture
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including Subchapter III of Chapter 33 of title 5 of the United States Code, it is hereby ordered that:
Section 1. Subject to the provisions of section 3 of this Executive Order, the officers named in section 2, in the order listed, shall act as and perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary of Agriculture (Secretary) during any period when both the Secretary and the Deputy Secretary of Agriculture (Deputy Secretary) have died, resigned, or are otherwise unable to perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary.
Sec. 2.
Order of Succession.
(a) Under Secretary of Agriculture for Farm and Foreign Agricultural Services;
(b) Under Secretary of Agriculture for Marketing and Regulatory Programs;
(c) Under Secretary of Agriculture for Rural Development;
(d) Under Secretary of Agriculture for Food, Nutrition, and Consumer Services;
(e) Under Secretary of Agriculture for Natural Resources and Environment;
(f) Under Secretary of Agriculture for Research, Education, and Economics;
(g) Under Secretary of Agriculture for Food Safety;
(h) General Counsel of the Department of Agriculture;
(i) Assistant Secretary of Agriculture for Administration; and
(j) Assistant Secretary of Agriculture for Congressional Relations.
Sec. 3.
Exceptions.
(a) No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 2(a)-(j) in an acting capacity shall act as Secretary pursuant to this Executive Order.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of this Executive Order, the President retains discretion, to the extent permitted by Subchapter III of Chapter 33 of title 5 of the United States Code, to depart from this Executive Order in designating an acting Secretary.Start Printed Page 66259
Sec. 4. Executive Order 11957 of January 13, 1977, is hereby revoked.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 66260
Executive Order 13242 of December 18, 2001
Providing an Order of Succession Within the Department of Commerce
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including Subchapter III of Chapter 33 of title 5 of the United States Code, it is hereby ordered that:
Section 1. Subject to the provisions of section 3 of this Executive Order, the officers named in section 2, in the order listed, shall act as and perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary of Commerce (Secretary) during any period when both the Secretary and the Deputy Secretary of Commerce (Deputy Secretary) have died, resigned, or are otherwise unable to perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary.
Sec. 2.
Order of Succession.
(a) General Counsel of the Department of Commerce;
(b) Under Secretary of Commerce for International Trade;
(c) Under Secretary of Commerce for Economic Affairs;
(d) Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere and Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration;
(e) Under Secretary of Commerce for Technology;
(f) Under Secretary of Commerce for Export Administration;
(g) Chief Financial Officer of the Department of Commerce and Assistant Secretary of Commerce in charge of Administration; and
(h) Assistant Secretary of Commerce in charge of Legislative and Intergovernmental Affairs.
Sec. 3.
Exceptions.
(a) No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 2(a)-(h) in an acting capacity shall act as Secretary pursuant to this Executive Order.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of this Executive Order, the President retains discretion, to the extent permitted by Subchapter III of Chapter 33 of title 5 of the United States Code, to depart from this Executive Order in designating an acting Secretary.Start Printed Page 66261
Sec. 4. Executive Order 11880 of October 2, 1975, Executive Order 12998 of April 5, 1996, and section 26 of Executive Order 12608 of September 9, 1987, are hereby revoked.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 66262
Executive Order 13243 of December 18, 2001
Providing an Order of Succession Within the Department of Housing and Urban Development
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including Subchapter III of Chapter 33 of title 5 of the United States Code, it is hereby ordered that:
Section 1. Subject to the provisions of section 3 of this Executive Order, the officers named in section 2, in the order listed, shall act as and perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary of Housing and Urban Development (Secretary) during any period when both the Secretary and the Deputy Secretary of Housing and Urban Development (Deputy Secretary) have died, resigned, or are otherwise unable to perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary.
Sec. 2.
Order of Succession.
(a) General Counsel of the Department of Housing and Urban Development;
(b) Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development in charge of Housing-Federal Housing Commission;
(c) Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development in charge of Community, Planning and Development;
(d) Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development in charge of Public and Indian Housing;
(e) Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development in charge of Policy Development and Research;
(f) Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development in charge of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity;
(g) Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development in charge of Congressional and Intergovernmental Relations;
(h) Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development in charge of Administration; and
(i) Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development in charge of Public Affairs.
Sec. 3.
Exceptions.
(a) No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 2(a)-(i) in an acting capacity shall act as Secretary pursuant to this Executive Order.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of this Executive Order, the President retains discretion, to the extent permitted by Subchapter III of Chapter 33 of title 5 of the United States Code, to depart from this Executive Order in designating an acting Secretary.Start Printed Page 66263
Sec. 4. Executive Order 11274 of March 30, 1996, is hereby revoked.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13244 of December 18, 2001
Providing an Order of Succession Within the Department of the Interior
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including Subchapter III of Chapter 33 of title 5 of the United States Code, it is hereby ordered that:
Section 1. Subject to the provisions of section 3 of this Executive Order, the officers named in section 2, in the order listed, shall act as and perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary of the Interior (Secretary) during any period when both the Secretary and the Deputy Secretary of the Interior (Deputy Secretary) have died, resigned, or are otherwise unable to perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary.
Sec. 2.
Order of Succession.
(a) Solicitor of the Department of the Interior;
(b) Assistant Secretary of the Interior in charge of Policy, Management and Budget;
(c) Assistant Secretary of the Interior in charge of Land and Minerals Management;
(d) Assistant Secretary of the Interior in charge of Water and Science;
(e) Assistant Secretary of the Interior for Fish and Wildlife and Parks; and
(f) Assistant Secretary of the Interior for Indian Affairs.
Sec. 3.
Exceptions.
(a) No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 2(a)-(f) in an acting capacity shall act as Secretary pursuant to this Executive Order.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of this Executive Order, the President retains discretion, to the extent permitted by Subchapter III of Chapter 33 of title 5 of the United States Code, to depart from this Executive Order in designating an acting Secretary.
Sec. 4. Executive Order 11487 of October 6, 1969, is hereby revoked.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 66268
Executive Order 13245 of December 18, 2001
Providing an Order of Succession Within the Department of Labor
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including Subchapter III of Chapter 33 of title 5 of the United States Code, it is hereby ordered that:
Section 1. Subject to the provisions of section 3 of this Executive Order, the officers named in section 2, in the order listed, shall act as and perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary of Labor (Secretary) during any period when both the Secretary and the Deputy Secretary of Labor (Deputy Secretary) have died, resigned, or are otherwise unable to perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary.
Sec. 2.
Order of Succession.
(a) Solicitor of Labor;
(b) Assistant Secretary of Labor in charge of Administration and Management;
(c) Assistant Secretary of Labor in charge of Policy;
(d) Assistant Secretary of Labor in charge of Congressional and Intergovernmental Affairs;
(e) Assistant Secretary of Labor in charge of the Employment and Training Administration;
(f) Assistant Secretary of Labor in charge of the Employment Standards Administration;
(g) Assistant Secretary of Labor in charge of the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration;
(h) Assistant Secretary of Labor for Occupational Safety and Health;
(i) Assistant Secretary of Labor for Mine Safety and Health;
(j) Assistant Secretary of Labor in charge of the Office of Public Affairs;
(k) Assistant Secretary of Labor for Veterans' Employment and Training; and
(l) Assistant Secretary of Labor in charge of the Office of Disability Employment Policy.
Sec. 3.
Exceptions.
(a) No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 2(a)-(l) in an acting capacity shall act as Secretary pursuant to this Executive Order.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of this Executive Order, the President retains discretion, to the extent permitted by Subchapter III of Chapter 33 of title 5 of the United States Code, to depart from this Executive Order in designating an acting Secretary.Start Printed Page 66269
Sec. 4. Executive Order 10513 of January 19, 1954, is hereby revoked.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 66270
Executive Order 13246 of December 18, 2001
Providing an Order of Succession Within the Department of the Treasury
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including Subchapter III of Chapter 33 of title 5 of the United States Code, it is hereby ordered that:
Section 1. Subject to the provisions of section 3 of this Executive Order, the officers named in section 2, in the order listed, shall act as and perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary of the Treasury (Secretary) during any period when both the Secretary and the Deputy Secretary of the Treasury (Deputy Secretary) have died, resigned, or are otherwise unable to perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary.
Sec. 2.
Order of Succession.
(a) Under Secretaries of the Treasury (including the Under Secretary of the Treasury for Enforcement), in the order in which they shall have taken the oath of office as such officers;
(b) General Counsel of the Department of the Treasury; and
(c) Deputy Under Secretaries of the Treasury and those Assistant Secretaries of the Treasury appointed by the President by and with the consent of the Senate, in the order in which they shall have taken the oath of office as such officers.
Sec. 3.
Exceptions.
(a) No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 2(a)-(c) in an acting capacity shall act as Secretary pursuant to this Executive Order.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of this Executive Order, the President retains discretion, to the extent
permitted by Subchapter III of Chapter 33 of title 5 of the United States Code, to depart from this Executive Order in designating an acting Secretary.
Sec. 4. Executive Order 11822 of December 10, 1974, is hereby revoked.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 66271
Executive Order 13247 of December 18, 2001
Providing an Order of Succession Within the Department of Veterans Affairs
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including Subchapter III of Chapter 33 of title 5 of the United States Code, it is hereby ordered that:
Sec. 1. Subject to the provisions of section 3 of this Executive Order, the officers named in section 2, in the order listed, shall act as and perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary of Veterans Affairs (Secretary) during any period when both the Secretary and the Deputy Secretary of Veterans Affairs (Deputy Secretary) have died, resigned, or are otherwise unable to perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary.
Sec. 2.
Order of Succession.
(a) Under Secretary of Veterans Affairs for Health;
(b) Under Secretary of Veterans Affairs for Benefits;
(c) Under Secretary of Veterans Affairs for Memorial Affairs;
(d) General Counsel of the Department of Veterans Affairs;
(e) Assistant Secretaries of Veterans Affairs, in the order in which they shall have taken the oath of office as Assistant Secretaries, other than the Chief Financial Officer and, if an Assistant Secretary, the Chief Information Officer;
(f) Chief Information Officer of the Department of Veterans Affairs, if the Chief Information Officer is an officer appointed by the President by and with the consent of the Senate;
(g) Chief Financial Officer of the Department of Veterans Affairs; and
(h) Chairman, Board of Veterans' Appeals.
Sec. 3.
Exceptions.
(a) No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 2(a)-(h) in an acting capacity shall act as Secretary pursuant to this Executive Order.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of this Executive Order, the President retains discretion, to the extent permitted by Subchapter III of Chapter Start Printed Page 6627233 of title 5 of the United States Code, to depart from this Executive Order in designating an acting Secretary.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13248 of December 20, 2001
Establishing an Emergency Board To Investigate a Dispute Between United Airlines, Inc., and its Mechanics and Related Employees Represented by the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers
A dispute exists between United Airlines, Inc., and its employees represented by the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers.
The dispute has not heretofore been adjusted under the provisions of the Railway Labor Act, as amended (45 U.S.C. 151-188) (the “Act”).
In the judgment of the National Mediation Board, this dispute threatens substantially to interrupt interstate commerce to a degree that would deprive sections of the country of essential transportation service.
NOW, THEREFORE, by the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, including sections 10 and 201 of the Act (45 U.S.C. 160 and 181), it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment of the Board (Board). There is established, effective December 21, 2001, a Board of three members to be appointed by the President to investigate and report on this dispute. No member may be pecuniarily or otherwise interested in any organization of airline employees or any air carrier. The Board shall perform its functions subject to the availability of funds.
Sec. 2.
Report. The Board shall report to the President with respect to this dispute within 30 days of its creation.
Sec. 3.
Maintaining Conditions. As provided by section 10 of the Act, from the date of the creation of the Board and for 30 days after the Board has submitted its report to the President, no change in the conditions out of which the dispute arose shall be made by the parties to the controversy, except by the agreement of the parties.
Sec. 4.
Records Maintenance. The records and files of the Board are records of the Office of the President and upon the Board's termination shall be maintained in the physical custody of the National Mediation Board.Start Printed Page 66706
Sec. 5.
Expiration. The Board shall terminate upon the submission of the report provided for in section 2 of this order.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13249 of December 28, 2001
Adjustments of Certain Rates of Pay
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the laws cited herein, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Statutory Pay Systems. The rates of basic pay or salaries of the statutory pay systems (as defined in 5 U.S.C. 5302(1)), as adjusted under 5 U.S.C. 5303(a), are set forth on the schedules attached hereto and made a part hereof:
(a) The General Schedule (5 U.S.C. 5332(a)) at Schedule 1;
(b) The Foreign Service Schedule (22 U.S.C. 3963) at Schedule 2; and
(c) The schedules for the Veterans Health Administration of the Department of Veterans Affairs (38 U.S.C. 7306, 7404; section 301(a) of Public Law 102-40) at Schedule 3.
Sec. 2.
Senior Executive Service. The rates of basic pay for senior executives in the Senior Executive Service, as adjusted under 5 U.S.C. 5382, are set forth on Schedule 4 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 3.
Executive Salaries. The rates of basic pay or salaries for the following offices and positions are set forth on the schedules attached hereto and made a part hereof:
(a) The Executive Schedule (5 U.S.C. 5312-5318) at Schedule 5;
(b) The Vice President (3 U.S.C. 104) and the Congress (2 U.S.C. 31) at Schedule 6; and
(c) Justices and judges (28 U.S.C. 5, 44(d), 135, 252, and 461(a)) at Schedule 7.
Sec. 4.
Uniformed Services. Pursuant to section 601 of S. 1438, the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2002 (which I signed into law on December 28, 2001), the rates of monthly basic pay (37 U.S.C. 203(a)) for members of the uniformed services and the rate of monthly cadet or midshipman pay (37 U.S.C. 203(c)) are set forth on Schedule 8 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 5.
Locality-Based Comparability Payments. (a) Pursuant to sections 5304 and 5304a of title 5, United States Code, and in accordance with section 646(a) of the Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act, 2002, Public Law 107-67, locality-based comparability payments shall be paid in accordance with Schedule 9 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
(b) The Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall take such actions as may be necessary to implement these payments and to publish appropriate notice of such payments in the Federal Register.
Sec. 6.
Administrative Law Judges. The rates of basic pay for administrative law judges, as adjusted under 5 U.S.C. 5372(b)(4), are set forth on Schedule 10 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 7.
Effective Dates. Schedule 8 is effective on January 1, 2002. The other schedules contained herein are effective on the first day of the first applicable pay period beginning on or after January 1, 2002.Start Printed Page 640
Sec. 8.
Prior Order Superseded. Executive Order 13182 of December 23, 2000, is superseded.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
December 28, 2001.
Start Printed Page 641
Start Printed Page 642
Start Printed Page 643
Start Printed Page 644
Start Printed Page 645
Start Printed Page 646
Start Printed Page 647
Start Printed Page 648
Executive Order 13250 of December 28, 2001
Providing an Order of Succession Within the Department of Health and Human Services
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and laws of the United States of America, including the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, 5 U.S.C. 3345 et seq., it is hereby ordered that:
Section 1. Subject to the provisions of section 3 of this order, the officers named in section 2, in the order listed, shall act as and perform the functions and duties of the Office of the Secretary of Health and Human Services (Secretary) during any period when both the Secretary and the Deputy Secretary of Health and Human Services (Deputy Secretary) have died, resigned, or become otherwise unable to perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary.
Sec. 2.
Order of Succession.
(a) The Assistant Secretaries of Health and Human Services appointed by the President and confirmed by the Senate, in the order in which they shall have taken the oath of office as such;
(b) The General Counsel of the Department of Health and Human Services; and
(c) Other officers within the Department of Health and Human Services who have been appointed by the President by and with the consent of the Senate, in the order in which they shall have taken the oath of office as such.
Sec. 3.
Exceptions.
(a) No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 2(a)-(c) of this order in an acting capacity shall act as Secretary pursuant to this order.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of this order, the President retains discretion, to the extent permitted by the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, 5 U.S.C. 3345 et seq., to depart from this order in designating an acting Secretary.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 1599
Executive Order 13251 of December 28, 2001
Providing an Order of Succession Within the Department of State
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and laws of the United States of America, including the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, 5 U.S.C. 3345 et seq., it is hereby ordered that:
Section 1. Subject to the provisions of section 3 of this order, the officers named in section 2, in the order listed, shall act as, and perform the duties of, the office of Secretary of State (Secretary) during any period in which the Secretary has died, resigned, or otherwise become unable to perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary.
Sec. 2.
Order of Succession.
(a) Deputy Secretary of State;
(b) Deputy Secretary of State for Management and Resources;
(c) Under Secretary of State designated for political affairs pursuant to section 2651a(b) of title 22, United States Code;
(d) Under Secretary of State designated for management affairs pursuant to section 2651a(b) of title 22, United States Code;
(e) The remaining Under Secretaries of State, in the order in which they shall have taken the oath of office as such;
(f) Assistant Secretaries of State designated for regional bureaus pursuant to section 2651a(c) of title 22, United States Code, in the order in which they shall have taken the oath of office as such;
(g) The following officers, in the order in which they shall have taken the oath of office as such:
(1) Remaining Assistant Secretaries of State;
(2) Coordinator for Counterterrorism;
(3) Director General of the Foreign Service; and
(4) Legal Adviser;
(h) United States Representative to the United Nations (New York);
(i) Deputy United States Representative to the United Nations (New York);
(j) The following other United States Representatives to the United Nations (New York), in the order in which they shall have taken the oath of office as such:
(1) United States Representative to the United Nations for United Nations Management and Reform;
(2) United States Representative to the United Nations on the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations; and
(3) Alternate United States Representative to the United Nations for Special Political Affairs in the United Nations;
(k) The following Chiefs of Mission, in the order listed:
(1) United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom;
(2) United States Ambassador to Canada;
(3) United States Ambassador to Australia;Start Printed Page 1600
(4) United States Ambassador to Mexico;
(5) United States Ambassador to Japan; and
(6) United States Ambassador to India;
(l) The following officers, in the order in which they shall have taken the oath of office as such:
(1) United States Ambassadors at Large;
(2) Counselor; and
(3) Special Representatives of the President; and
(m) The remaining Chiefs of Mission, in the order in which they shall have taken the oath of office as such.
Sec. 3.
Exceptions.
(a) No individual who has not been appointed by the President by and with the consent of the Senate shall act as Secretary pursuant to this order.
(b) No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 2(a)-(m) in an acting capacity shall act as Secretary pursuant to this order.
(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of this order, the President retains discretion, to the extent permitted by the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, 5 U.S.C. 3345 et seq., to depart from this order in designating an acting Secretary.
(d) A successor office, intended to be the equivalent of an office identified in section 2 of this order, shall be deemed to be the position identified in section 2 for purposes of this order.
Sec. 4. Executive Order 12343 of January 27, 1982, is hereby revoked.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 1601
Executive Order 13252 of January 7, 2002
Exclusions From the Federal Labor-Management Relations Program
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 7103(b)(1) of title 5, United States Code, and in order to exempt certain subdivisions of the Department of Justice from coverage under the Federal Labor-Management Relations Program, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Determinations. The subdivisions of the Department of Justice set forth in section 2 of this order are hereby determined to have as a primary function intelligence, counterintelligence, investigative, or national security work. It is further determined that chapter 71 of title 5, United States Code, cannot be applied to these subdivisions in a manner consistent with national security requirements and considerations.
Sec. 2.
Amendment of Executive Order 12171. Executive Order 12171 of November 19, 1979, as amended, is further amended by adding to the end of section 1-209 the following new subsections:
“(c) United States Attorneys' Offices.
(d) Criminal Division.
(e) INTERPOL—U.S. National Central Bureau.
(f) National Drug Intelligence Center.
(g) Office of Intelligence Policy and Review.”
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13253 of January 16, 2002
Amendment to Executive Order 13223, Ordering the Ready Reserve of the Armed Forces to Active Duty and Delegating Certain Authorities to the Secretary of Defense and the
Secretary of Transportation
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and in furtherance of Proclamation 7463 of September 14, 2001, Declaration of National Emergency by Reason of Certain Terrorist Attacks, which declared a national emergency by reason of the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center, New York, New York, and the Pentagon, and the continuing and immediate threat of further attacks on the United States, and in order to provide the Secretary of Transportation, with respect to the Coast Guard, with the authority to manage personnel requirements in a manner consistent with the authorization provided to the Secretary of Defense in Executive Order 13223 of September 14, 2001, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Section 5 of Executive Order 13223 is amended by adding at the end: “The Secretary of Transportation is further designated and empowered, without the approval, ratification or any other action by the President, to exercise the authority vested in the President by sections 123 and 123a of title 10, United States Code, and sections 149 (detail members to assist foreign governments), 275(a) (suspension of provisions on selection, promotion, or involuntary separation of officers), and 722 (administration of reserve forces) of title 14, United States Code, as invoked by section 2 of Executive Order 13223.”
Sec. 2. Section 7 of Executive Order 13223 is deleted and revised to read as follows: “Based upon my determination under 10 U.S.C. 2201(c) that it is necessary to increase (subject to limits imposed by law) the number of members of the armed forces on active duty for the Department of Defense beyond the number for which funds are provided in the appropriation Act for the Department of Defense, which, by virtue of 14 U.S.C. 652, applies to the Department of Transportation with respect to the Coast Guard, the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Transportation may provide Start Printed Page 2792for the cost of such additional members under their respective jurisdictions as an excepted expense under section 11(a) of title 41, United States Code.”
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13254 of January 29, 2002
Establishing the USA Freedom Corps
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. Building on our Nation's rich tradition of citizen service, this Administration's policy is to foster a culture of responsibility, service, and citizenship by promoting, expanding, and enhancing public service opportunities for all Americans and by making these opportunities readily available to citizens from all geographic areas, professions, and walks of life. More specifically, this Administration encourages all Americans to serve their country for the equivalent of at least 2 years (4,000 hours) over their lifetimes. Toward those ends, the executive departments, agencies, and offices constituting the USA Freedom Corps shall coordinate and strengthen Federal and other service opportunities, including opportunities for participation in homeland security preparedness and response, other areas of public and social service, and international service. The executive branch departments, agencies, and offices also will work with State and local governments and private entities to foster and encourage participation in public and social service programs, as appropriate.
Sec. 2.
USA Freedom Corps.
The USA Freedom Corps shall be an interagency initiative, bringing together executive branch departments, agencies, and offices with public service programs and components, including but not limited to programs and components with the following functions:
(i) recruiting, mobilizing, and encouraging all Americans to engage in public service;
(ii) providing concrete opportunities to engage in public service;
(iii) providing the public with access to information about public service opportunities through Federal programs and elsewhere; and
(iv) providing recognition and awards to volunteers and other participants in public service programs.
Sec. 3.
USA Freedom Corps Council. (a)
Establishment and Mission. There shall be a USA Freedom Corps Council (Council) chaired by the President and composed of heads of executive branch departments, agencies, and offices, which shall have the following functions:
(i) serving as a forum for Federal officials responsible for public service programs to coordinate and improve public service programs and activities administered by the executive branch;
(ii) working to encourage all Americans to engage in public service, whether through Federal programs or otherwise;
(iii) advising the President and heads of executive branch departments, agencies, and offices concerning the optimization of current Federal programs to enhance public service opportunities;
(iv) coordinating public outreach and publicity of citizen service opportunities provided by Federal programs;
(v) encouraging schools, universities, private public service organizations, and other non-Federal entities to foster and reward public service;
(vi) studying the availability of public service opportunities provided by the Federal Government and elsewhere; andStart Printed Page 4870
(vii) tracking progress in participation in public service programs.
(b) Membership. In addition to the Chair, the members of the Council shall be the heads of the executive branch departments, agencies, and offices listed below, or their designees, and such other officers of the executive branch as the President may from time to time designate. Every member of the Council or designee shall be a full-time or permanent part-time officer or employee of the Federal Government. Members shall not be compensated for their service on the Council in addition to the salaries they receive as employees or officers of the Federal Government.
(i) Vice President;
(ii) Attorney General;
(iii) Secretary of State;
(iv) Secretary of Health and Human Services;
(v) Secretary of Commerce;
(vi) Secretary of Education;
(vii) Secretary of Veterans Affairs;
(viii) Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
(ix) Chief Executive Officer of the Corporation for National and Community Service;
(x) Director of the Peace Corps;
(xi) Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development;
(xii) Director of the USA Freedom Corps Office; and
(xiii) Director of the Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives.
(c) Chair. The President shall be the Chair of the USA Freedom Corps Council, and in his absence, the Vice President shall serve as Chair. The Director of the USA Freedom Corps Office may, at the President's direction, preside over meetings of the Council in the President's and Vice President's absence.
(d) Honorary Co-Chair. The President may, from time to time, designate an Honorary Co-Chair or Co-Chairs, who shall serve in an advisory role to the Council and to the President on matters considered by the Council. Any Honorary Co-Chair shall be a full-time or permanent part-time employee or officer of the Federal Government.
(e) Meetings. The Council shall meet at the President's direction. The Director of the USA Freedom Corps Office shall be responsible, at the President's direction, for determining the agenda, ensuring that necessary papers are prepared, and recording Council actions and Presidential decisions.
(f) Responsibilities of Executive Branch Departments, Agencies, and Offices.
(i) Members of the Council shall remain responsible for overseeing the programs administered by their respective departments, agencies, and offices. Each such department, agency, and office will retain its authority and responsibility to administer those programs according to law;
(ii) Each executive branch department, agency, or office with responsibility for programs relating to the functions and missions of the USA Freedom Corps as described in section 2 of this order shall be responsible for identifying those public service opportunities and coordinating with the USA Freedom Corps Council to ensure that such programs are, if appropriate, publicized and encouraged by the Council; and
(iii) Upon the request of the Chair, and to the extent permitted by law, the heads of executive branch departments and agencies shall provide the Council with relevant information.
Sec. 4.
USA Freedom Corps Office. (a) General. The USA Freedom Corps also shall be supported by a USA Freedom Corps Office (Office), which Start Printed Page 4871shall be a component of the White House Office. The USA Freedom Corps Office shall have a Director who shall be appointed by the President. The Director shall be assisted by an appropriate staff within the White House Office.
(b) Presidential Recognition to Participants in USA Freedom Corps Programs. In addition to supporting and facilitating the functions of the Council listed in section 3 of this order, the Office shall support the President in providing recognition to volunteers and other participants in programs and activities relating to the functions and missions of the USA Freedom Corps as described in section 2 of this order.
Sec. 5.
General Provisions. (a) The White House Office shall provide the Council and Office with such funding and administrative support, to the extent permitted by law and subject to the availability of appropriations, as directed by the Chief of Staff to the President to carry out the provisions of this order.
(b) This order does not alter the existing authorities or roles of executive branch departments, agencies, or offices. Nothing in this order shall supersede any requirement made by or under law.
(c) This order does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity, against the United States, its departments, agencies, or other entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13255 of February 6, 2002
Amendment to Executive Order 13227, President's Commission on Excellence in Special Education
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to extend the reporting date of the President's Commission on Excellence in Special Education, it is hereby ordered that Executive Order 13227 of October 2, 2001, is amended by deleting “April 30, 2002” in section 3(b) of that order and inserting in lieu thereof “July 1, 2002”.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13256 of February 12, 2002
President's Board of Advisors on Historically Black Colleges and Universities
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, in order to advance the development of the Nation's full human potential and to advance equal opportunity in higher education, to strengthen the capacity of historically black colleges and universities to provide the highest quality education, and to increase opportunities for these institutions to participate in and benefit from Federal programs, as do other colleges and universities, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. There is established, in the Office of the Secretary of Education, a Presidential advisory committee entitled the “President's Board of Advisors on Historically Black Colleges and Universities” (Board). The Board shall prepare and issue an annual report to the President on the results of the participation of historically black colleges and universities in Federal programs. The Board also shall provide advice to the President and to the Secretary of Education (Secretary) regarding the needs of historically black colleges and universities in the areas of infrastructure, academic programs, and faculty and institutional development. In the annual report to the President, the Board shall make recommendations on how to increase the private sector role, including the role of private foundations, in strengthening historically black colleges and universities. Particular emphasis should also be given in the report to enhancing institutional planning and development, strengthening fiscal stability and financial management, and improving institutional infrastructure, including the use of technology, to ensure the long-term viability and enhancement of these institutions.
Sec. 2. The Board shall be appointed by the President. The Board membership shall include sitting presidents of historically black colleges and universities, representatives of other higher education institutions, business and financial leaders, representatives of private foundations, and secondary school administrators. The President shall designate a Chair or Co-Chairs from among the members.
Sec. 3. The White House Initiative on Historically Black Colleges and Universities (Initiative), located in the Office of the Secretary of Education, shall: (1) provide staff, resources, and assistance to the Board; (2) assist the Secretary in performing the liaison function between the executive branch and historically black colleges and universities; and (3) serve the Secretary in carrying out the responsibilities described in section 6 of this order.
Sec. 4. To carry out this order, each executive department and agency identified by the Secretary may, consistent with applicable law and regulations, enter into appropriate grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements with historically black colleges and universities. The head of each department or agency so identified shall establish an annual plan that will establish clear goals for how the department or agency intends to increase the capacity of historically black colleges and universities to compete effectively for grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements and to encourage historically black colleges and universities to participate in Federal programs. The department's or agency's annual goal should be clearly reflected in the department's or agency's annual budget submission to the Office of Management and Start Printed Page 6824Budget. To facilitate the attainment of these goals, the head of each department or agency identified by the Secretary shall provide, as appropriate, technical assistance and information to historically black colleges and universities regarding the program activities of the department or agency and the preparation of applications or proposals for grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements.
Sec. 5. Each executive department and agency identified by the Secretary shall appoint a senior official, who is a full-time officer of the Federal Government, to report directly to the department or agency head with respect to department or agency activity under this order, and to serve as liaison to the Board and to the Initiative. To the extent permitted by law and regulations, each executive department and agency identified by the Secretary shall provide appropriate information requested by the Board and staff pursuant to the order.
Sec. 6. Each executive department and agency identified by the Secretary shall develop an annual plan for, and shall document the agency's effort in, increasing the capacity of historically black colleges and universities to participate in Federal programs. Each department's and agency's plan shall describe new or existing department and agency programs and measurable objectives for proposed department and agency actions, in connection with those programs, to achieve the purposes of this order. These plans shall be submitted at such time and in such form as the Secretary shall require. In consultation with the participating departments and agencies, the Secretary shall review the plans and develop, with the advice of the Board, an integrated Annual Federal Plan for Assistance to Historically Black Colleges and Universities for submission to the President. The Secretary shall provide the president of each historically black college and university with a copy of, and an opportunity to comment on, the proposed Annual Federal Plan prior to its submission to the President. Each participating department and agency shall submit to the Secretary an Annual Performance Report that shall measure each department's and agency's performance against the objectives set forth in the department's or agency's annual plan. The Secretary shall be responsible for monitoring compliance with the Annual Federal Plan after it is approved by the President.
Sec. 7. In developing its annual plan, each executive department and agency identified by the Secretary shall emphasize programs and activities that develop the capacity of historically black colleges and universities to contribute to the development of human capital and to strengthen America's economic and technological base through: (1) infrastructure development and acquisitions for instruction and research; (2) student and faculty doctoral fellowships and faculty development; (3) domestic and international faculty and student exchanges and study-abroad opportunities; (4) undergraduate and graduate student internships; and (5) summer, part-time, and permanent employment opportunities.
Sec. 8. Each year, the Board shall report to the President on the progress achieved in enhancing the capacity of historically black colleges and universities to serve their students, including findings and recommendations for individual departments and agencies in connection with their Annual Performance Reports, as described in section 6 of this order.
Sec. 9. The Board, in consultation with the Department of Education and other executive departments and agencies, shall develop a Private Sector Strategy to assist historically black colleges and universities in: (1) increasing voluntary private-sector contributions to support the enhancement of endowments and the overall financial stability of such institutions; (2) improving and enhancing the quality and number of private-sector partnerships focused on academic program development, student achievement and faculty development, cooperative research and development projects, and faculty exchanges; and (3) improving information management, and facilities, and strengthening academic course offerings.Start Printed Page 6825
Sec. 10. (a) The provisions in this Executive Order shall be implemented to the fullest extent permitted by law.
(b) The Department of Education shall provide funding and administrative support for the Board and the Initiative.
(c) Members of the Board shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for all travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law;
(d) Insofar as the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended, may apply to the Board, any functions of the President under that Act, except for those in section 6 of that Act, shall be performed by the Department of Education, in accordance with the guidelines that have been issued by the Administrator of General Services.
Sec. 11. Executive Order 12876 of November 1, 1993, as amended, is hereby revoked.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13257 of February 13, 2002
President's Interagency Task Force To Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000, (22 U.S.C. 7103) (the “Act”), and in order to combat trafficking in persons, a contemporary manifestation of slavery whose victims are predominantly women and children, to ensure just and effective punishment of traffickers, and to protect their victims, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. (a) The President's Interagency Task Force to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons is hereby established.
(b) The Task Force shall consist of:
(i) the Secretary of State;
(ii) the Attorney General;
(iii) the Secretary of Labor;
(iv) the Secretary of Health and Human Services;
(v) the Director of Central Intelligence;
(vi) the Director of the Office of Management and Budget;
(vii) the Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development; and
(viii) any additional officers or employees of the United States as may be designated by the President.
(c) The Task Force shall be chaired by the Secretary of State.
Sec. 2.
Activities. The Task Force shall, consistent with applicable law and the constitutional authorities and duties of the President, carry out the following activities:
(a) coordinate the implementation of the Act;
(b) measure and evaluate progress of the United States and other countries in the areas of trafficking in persons prevention, protection, and assistance to victims of trafficking in persons, and prosecutions and other enforcement efforts against traffickers, including the role of public corruption in facilitating trafficking in persons;
(c) assist the Secretary of State in the preparation of the annual reports described in section 110 of the Act;
(d) expand interagency procedures to collect and organize data, including significant research and resource information on domestic and international trafficking in persons, while ensuring that any data collection procedures involved, respect the confidentiality of victims of trafficking in persons;
(e) engage in efforts to facilitate cooperation among countries of origin, transit, and destination, and such efforts shall aim to strengthen local and regional capacities to prevent trafficking in persons, prosecute traffickers and assist trafficking victims; shall include initiatives to enhance cooperative efforts between destination countries, transit countries, and countries of origin; and shall assist in the appropriate reintegration of stateless victims of trafficking in persons;Start Printed Page 7260
(f) examine the role of the international “sex tourism” industry in the trafficking of persons and in the sexual exploitation of women and children around the world;
(g) engage in consultation and advocacy with governmental and nongovernmental organizations, among other entities, to advance the purposes of the Act; and
(h) address such other matters related to the purposes of the Act as the President may determine.
Sec. 3.
Administration. (a) The Department of State shall provide funding and administrative support for the Task Force, except as otherwise provided by the Act.
(b) At the call of the Chair, the Task Force shall meet as necessary to accomplish its mission.
(c) Task Force members may designate representatives from their respective agencies to represent them at Task Force meetings.
(d) Whenever the work of the Task Force involves a matter committed by law or Presidential directive to the consideration of the National Security Council, or by Executive Order 13228 of October 8, 2001, to the consideration of the Homeland Security Council, that work shall be undertaken, and any communication by the Secretary of State to the President shall be undertaken, in a manner consistent with such law, Presidential directive, or Executive Order.
(e) The Task Force shall have no directive authority or other substantial independent authority.
(f) As necessary and appropriate, the Task Force shall report to the President, through the Secretary of State, the following:
(i) progress on the implementation of the Act; and
(ii) recommendations for United States policy to monitor and eliminate trafficking in persons and to protect the victims of trafficking in persons.
Sec. 4.
Judicial Review.
This order does not create any rights or benefits, enforceable at law or equity, against the United States, its departments, its agencies, or other entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13258 of February 26, 2002
Amending Executive Order 12866 on Regulatory Planning and Review
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered that Executive Order 12866, of September 30, 1993, is amended as follows:
Section 1. Section (2)(b) is amended by striking “, the Vice President, and other regulatory policy advisors” and inserting in lieu thereof “and regulatory policy advisors”.
Sec. 2. Section (2)(c) is amended by:
(a) striking in the heading the words “The Vice President” and inserting in lieu thereof “Assistance”;
(b) striking the sentence that begins “The Vice President is”;
(c) striking “In fulfilling their responsibilities” and inserting in lieu thereof “In fulfilling his responsibilities”; and
(d) striking “and the Vice President” both times it appears.
Sec. 3. Section 3(a) is amended by:
(a) striking “and Vice President”;
(b) striking “the Assistant to the President for Science and Technology” and inserting in lieu thereof “the Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy”;
(c) striking “the Assistant to the President for Intergovernmental Affairs” and inserting in lieu thereof “the Deputy Assistant to the President and Director for Intergovernmental Affairs”;
(d) striking “the Deputy Assistant to the President and Director of the White House Office of Environmental Policy” and inserting in lieu thereof “the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality and Director of the Office of Environmental Quality”; and
(e) striking “and (12)” and inserting in lieu thereof “(12) the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security; and (13)”.
Sec. 4. Section 4(a) is amended by striking “the Vice President shall convene” and inserting in lieu thereof “the Director shall convene”.
Sec. 5. Section 4(c)(3) is amended by striking “, the Advisors, and the Vice President” and inserting in lieu thereof “and the Advisors”.
Sec. 6. Section 4(c)(4) is amended by striking “, the Advisors, and the Vice President” and inserting in lieu thereof “and the Advisors”.
Sec. 7. Section 4(c)(5) is amended by striking “, the Advisors, and the Vice President” and inserting in lieu thereof “and the Advisors”.
Sec. 8. Section 4(c)(6) is amended by striking “Vice President, with the Advisors' assistance,” and inserting in lieu thereof “Director”.
Sec. 9. Section 4(d) is amended by:
(a) striking “, the Advisors, and the Vice President” and inserting in lieu thereof “and the Advisors”; and
(b) striking “periodically advise the Vice President” and inserting in lieu thereof “periodically advise the Director”.Start Printed Page 9386
Sec. 10. Section 5(c) is amended by striking “Vice President” and inserting in lieu thereof “Director”.
Sec. 11. Section 6(b)(4)(C)(i) is amended by striking “Vice Presidential and”.
Sec. 12. Section 7 is amended by:
(a) striking “resolved by the President, or by the Vice President acting at the request of the President” and inserting in lieu thereof “resolved by the President, with the assistance of the Chief of Staff to the President (“Chief of Staff”)”;
(b) striking “Vice Presidential and Presidential consideration” and inserting in lieu thereof “Presidential consideration”;
(c) striking “recommendations developed by the Vice President” and inserting in lieu thereof “recommendations developed by the Chief of Staff”;
(d) striking “Vice Presidential and Presidential review period” and inserting in lieu thereof “Presidential review period”;
(e) striking “or to the staff of the Vice President” and inserting in lieu thereof “or to the staff of the Chief of Staff”;
(f) striking “the President, or the Vice President acting at the request of the President, shall notify” and insert in lieu thereof “the President, or the Chief of Staff acting at the request of the President, shall notify”.
Sec. 13. Section 7 is also amended in the first paragraph by inserting the designation “(a)” after the words “Resolution of Conflicts.”, and by designating the following three paragraphs as “(b)”, “(c)”, and “(d)” in order.
Sec. 14. Section 8 is amended by striking “Vice President” both times it appears and inserting in lieu thereof “Director”.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13259 of March 19, 2002
Designation of Public International Organizations for Purposes of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 30A(f)(1)(B)(ii) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78dd-1(f)(1)(B)(ii)) and sections 104(h)(2)(B)(ii) and 104A(f)(2)(B)(ii) of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977 (15 U.S.C. 78dd-2(h)(2)(B)(ii), 78dd-3(f)(2)(B)(ii)), I hereby designate as “public international organizations” for the purposes of application of section 30A of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and sections 104 and 104A of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977:
(a) The European Union, including: the European Communities (the European Community, the European Coal & Steel Community, and the European Atomic Energy Community); institutions of the European Union, such as the European Commission, the Council of the European Union, the European Parliament, the European Court of Justice, the European Court of Auditors, the Economic and Social Committee, the Committee of the Regions, the European Central Bank, and the European Investment Bank; and any departments, agencies, and instrumentalities thereof; and
(b) The European Police Office (Europol), including any departments, agencies, and instrumentalities thereof.
Designation in this Executive Order is intended solely to further the purposes of the statutes mentioned above and is not determinative of whether an entity is a public international organization for the purpose of other statutes or regulations.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 13241
Executive Order 13260 of March 19, 2002
Establishing the President's Homeland Security Advisory Council and Senior Advisory Committees for Homeland
Security
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
President's Homeland Security Advisory Council.
(a) Establishment and Membership. I hereby establish the President's Homeland Security Advisory Council (PHSAC). The PHSAC shall be composed of not more than 21 members appointed by the President. In addition, the Chair and the Vice Chair of the National Infrastructure Advisory Council; the Chairman of the President's National Security Telecommunications Advisory Committee; and the Chair of the Panel on the Science and Technology of Combating Terrorism, President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, shall serve as ex officio members of the PHSAC. The appointed members of the PHSAC shall be selected from the private sector, academia, professional service associations, federally funded research and development centers, nongovernmental organizations, State and local governments, and other appropriate professions and communities.
(b)
Chair and Vice Chair. The President shall designate a Chair and Vice Chair from among the appointed members of the PHSAC.
(c)
Senior Advisory Committees. (i) Establishment and Membership. The following four Senior Advisory Committees for Homeland Security (SACs) are hereby established to advise the PHSAC: (1) State and Local Officials; (2) Academia and Policy Research; (3) Private Sector; and (4) Emergency Services, Law Enforcement, and Public Health and Hospitals. Each SAC shall generally be composed of not more than 17 members selected by the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security (Assistant). The President may establish additional SACs as appropriate, consistent with this order.
(ii)
Chairs and Vice Chairs. The Assistant shall from time to time designate a Chair and Vice Chair for each of the SACs from among the PHSAC's members.
(iii)
Subcommittees. The Chair of each SAC, in consultation with the PHSAC, may as appropriate establish subcommittees to advise the SAC.
Sec. 2.
Functions. The PHSAC shall meet periodically at the Assistant's request to:
(a) provide advice to the President through the Assistant on developing and coordinating the implementation of a comprehensive national strategy to secure the United States from terrorist threats or attacks;
(b) recommend to the President through the Assistant ways to improve coordination, cooperation, and communication among Federal, State, and local officials and private and other entities, and provide a means to collect scholarly research, technological advice, and information concerning processes and organizational management practices both inside and outside of the Federal Government;
(c) provide advice to the President through the Assistant regarding the feasibility of implementing specific measures to detect, prepare for, prevent, protect against, respond to, and recover from terrorist threats or attacks within the United States;Start Printed Page 13242
(d) examine, and advise the President through the Assistant on, the effectiveness of the implementation of specific strategies to detect, prepare for, prevent, protect against, respond to, and recover from terrorist threats or attacks within the United States; and
(e) report periodically, as appropriate, to the President through the Assistant on matters within the scope of the PHSAC's functions as described in paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section.
Sec. 3.
Administration. (a) Upon the request of the Chair of the PHSAC, through the Assistant, and to the extent permitted by law, the heads of executive departments and agencies shall provide the PHSAC with such information relating to homeland security matters as the PHSAC may need for the purpose of carrying out its functions.
(b) The PHSAC shall have an Executive Director selected by the Assistant.
(c) Members shall serve without compensation for their work on the PHSAC, the SACs, and any subcommittees thereof. However, members shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in Federal Government service (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707).
(d) To the extent permitted by law, and subject to the availability of appropriations, the Office of Administration shall provide the PHSAC with administrative support and with such funds as may be necessary for the performance of the PHSAC's functions.
Sec. 4.
General Provisions. (a) Insofar as the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.) (Act), may apply to the administration of any portion of this order, any functions of the President under that Act, except that of reporting to the Congress, shall be performed by the Administrator of General Services in accordance with the guidelines that have been issued by the Administrator.
(b) The PHSAC, any SACs, and any SAC subcommittees shall terminate 2 years from the date of this order unless extended by the President.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 13243
Executive Order 13261 of March 19, 2002
Providing An Order of Succession in the Environmental Protection Agency and Amending Certain Orders on Succession
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, 5 U.S.C. 3345, et seq., it is hereby ordered that:
Section 1. Subject to the provisions of section 3 of this order, the officers named in section 2, in the order listed, shall act as and perform the functions and duties of the office of the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency (Administrator) during any period when both the Administrator and the Deputy Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency have died, resigned, or become otherwise unable to perform the functions and duties of the office of Administrator.
Sec. 2.
Order of Succession.
(a) Assistant Administrator for Toxic Substances;
(b) Assistant Administrator (Air and Radiation);
(c) Assistant Administrator, Office of Solid Waste;
(d) Assistant Administrator (Water Programs);
(e) Assistant Administrator (General Counsel);
(f) Assistant Administrator (Enforcement and Compliance Assurance);
(g) Chief Financial Officer;
(h) Assistant Administrator (Research and Development);
(i) Assistant Administrator (International Activities);
(j) Assistant Administrator (Administration and Resources Management); and
(k) Assistant Administrator (Environmental Information).
Sec. 3.
Exceptions.
(a) No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 2(a)-(k) in an acting capacity, by virtue of so serving, shall act as Administrator pursuant to this order.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of this order, the President retains discretion, to the extent permitted by the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, 5 U.S.C. 3345 et seq., to depart from this order in designating an acting Administrator.
Sec. 4.
Amendments to Certain Executive Orders providing Orders of Succession. Executive Orders 13241, 13242, 13243, 13244, 13245, 13246, and 13247 of December 18, 2001, and Executive Orders 13250 and 13251 of December 28, 2001, are hereby amended as follows:
(a) Section 3(a) of Executive Order 13241 of December 18, 2001, entitled “Providing an Order of Succession Within the Department of Agriculture,” is replaced with the following: “(a) No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 2(a)-(j) in an acting capacity shall, by virtue of so serving, act as Secretary pursuant to this order.”;
(b) Section 3(a) of Executive Order 13242 of December 18, 2001, entitled “Providing an Order of Succession Within the Department of Commerce,” is replaced with the following: “(a) No individual who is serving in an Start Printed Page 13244office listed in section 2(a)-(h) in an acting capacity shall, by virtue of so serving, act as Secretary pursuant to this order.”;
(c) Section 3(a) of Executive Order 13243 of December 18, 2001, entitled “Providing an Order of Succession Within the Department of Housing and Urban Development,” is replaced with the following: “(a) No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 2(a)-(i) in an acting capacity shall, by virtue of so serving, act as Secretary pursuant to this order.”;
(d) Section 3(a) of Executive Order 13244 of December 18, 2001, entitled “Providing an Order of Succession Within the Department of the Interior,” is replaced with the following: “(a) No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 2(a)-(f) in an acting capacity shall, by virtue of so serving, act as Secretary pursuant to this order.”;
(e) Section 3(a) of Executive Order 13245 of December 18, 2001, entitled “Providing an Order of Succession Within the Department of Labor,” is replaced with the following: “(a) No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 2(a)-(l) in an acting capacity shall, by virtue of so serving, act as Secretary pursuant to this order.”;
(f) Section 3(a) of Executive Order 13246 of December 18, 2001, entitled “Providing an Order of Succession Within the Department of the Treasury,” is replaced with the following: “(a) No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 2(a)-(c) in an acting capacity shall, by virtue of so serving, act as Secretary pursuant to this order.”;
(g) Section 3(a) of Executive Order 13247 of December 18, 2001, entitled “Providing an Order of Succession Within the Department of Veterans Affairs,” is replaced with the following: “(a) No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 2(a)-(h) in an acting capacity shall, by virtue of so serving, act as Secretary pursuant to this order.”;
(h) Section 3(a) of Executive Order 13250 of December 28, 2001, entitled “Providing an Order of Succession Within the Department of Health and Human Services,” is replaced with the following: “(a) No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 2(a)-(c) in an acting capacity shall, by virtue of so serving, act as Secretary pursuant to this order.” and;
(i) Section 3(b) of Executive Order 13251 of December 28, 2001, entitled “Providing an Order of Succession Within the Department of State,” is replaced with the following: “(b) No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 2(a)-(m) in an acting capacity shall, by virtue of so serving, act as Secretary pursuant to this order.”.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13262 of April 11, 2002
2002 Amendments to the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including chapter 47 of title 10, United States Code (Uniform Code of Military Justice, 10 U.S.C. 801-946), and in order to prescribe amendments to the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, prescribed by Executive Order 12473, as amended, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Thirty days after the date of this Executive Order, the provisions of Federal Rule of Evidence 415, adopted September 13, 1994, will no longer be applicable to the Military Rules of Evidence. This evidentiary rule became applicable to courts-martial on January 6, 1996, pursuant to Military Rule of Evidence 1102.
Sec. 2. The last subparagraph of paragraph 4, of Part I, of the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, is amended as follows:
“The Manual shall be identified as “Manual for Courts-Martial, United States (2002 edition).” Any amendments to the Manual made by Executive Order shall be identified as “2002” Amendments to the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States” ; “2002” being the year the Executive Order was signed. If two or more Executive Orders amending the Manual are signed during the same year, then the second and any subsequent Executive Orders will be identified by placing a small case letter of the alphabet after the last digit of the year beginning with “a” for the second Executive Order and continuing in alphabetic order for subsequent Executive Orders.”.
Sec. 3. Part II of the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, is amended as follows:
a. R.C.M. 201(f)(2)(B) is amended to read as follows:
“(i) Upon a finding of guilty, special courts-martial may adjudge, under limitations prescribed by this Manual, any punishment authorized under R.C.M. 1003 except death, dishonorable discharge, dismissal, confinement for more than 1 year, hard labor without confinement for more than 3 months, forfeiture of pay exceeding two-thirds pay per month, or any forfeiture of pay for more than 1 year.
“(ii) A bad-conduct discharge, confinement for more than six months, or forfeiture of pay for more than six months, may not be adjudged by a special court-martial unless:
“(a) Counsel qualified under Article 27(b) is detailed to represent the accused; and
“(b) A military judge is detailed to the trial, except in a case in which a military judge could not be detailed because of physical conditions or military exigencies. Physical conditions or military exigencies, as the terms are here used, may exist under rare circumstances, such as on an isolated ship on the high seas or in a unit in an inaccessible area, provided compelling reasons exist why the trial must be held at that time and at that place. Mere inconvenience does not constitute a physical condition or military exigency and does not excuse a failure to detail a military judge. If a military judge cannot be detailed because of physical conditions or military exigencies, a bad-conduct discharge, confinement for more than six months, or forfeiture of pay for more than Start Printed Page 18774six months, may be adjudged provided the other conditions have been met. In that event, however, the convening authority shall, prior to trial, make a written statement explaining why a military judge could not be obtained. This statement shall be appended to the record of trial and shall set forth in detail the reasons why a military judge could not be detailed, and why the trial had to be held at that time and place.”
b. R.C.M. 701(b)(4) is amended to read as follows:
“(4) Reports of examination and tests. If the defense requests disclosure under subsection (a)(2)(B) of this rule, upon compliance with such request by the Government, the defense, on request of trial counsel, shall (except as provided in R.C.M. 706, Mil. R. Evid. 302, and Mil. R. Evid. 513) permit the trial counsel to inspect any results or reports of physical or mental examinations and of scientific tests or experiments made in connection with the particular case, or copies thereof, that are within the possession, custody, or control of the defense that the defense intends to introduce as evidence in the defense case-in-chief at trial or that were prepared by a witness whom the defense intends to call at trial when the results or reports relate to that witness' testimony.”
c. R.C.M. 806 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection (d):
“(d) Protective orders. The military judge may, upon request of any party or sua sponte, issue an appropriate protective order, in writing, to prevent parties and witnesses from making extrajudicial statements that present a substantial likelihood of material prejudice to a fair trial by impartial members. For purposes of this subsection, “military judge” does not include the president of a special court-martial without a military judge.”.
d. R.C.M. 1001(b)(3)(A) is amended to read as follows:
“(A) In general. The trial counsel may introduce evidence of military or civilian convictions of the accused. For purposes of this rule, there is a “conviction” in a court-martial case when a sentence has been adjudged. In a civilian case, a “conviction” includes any disposition following an initial judicial determination or assumption of guilt, such as when guilt has been established by guilty plea, trial, or plea of nolo contendere, regardless of the subsequent disposition, sentencing procedure, or final judgment. However, a “civilian conviction” does not include a diversion from the judicial process without a finding or admission of guilt; expunged convictions; juvenile adjudications; minor traffic violations; foreign convictions; tribal court convictions; or convictions reversed, vacated, invalidated or pardoned because of errors of law or because of subsequently discovered evidence exonerating the accused.”.
e. R.C.M. 1003(b)(3) is amended to read as follows:
“(3) Fine. Any court-martial may adjudge a fine in lieu of or in addition to forfeitures. Special and summary courts-martial may not adjudge any fine or combination of fine and forfeitures in excess of the total amount of forfeitures that may be adjudged in that case. In order to enforce collection, a fine may be accompanied by a provision in the sentence that, in the event the fine is not paid, the person fined shall, in addition to any period of confinement adjudged, be further confined until a fixed period considered an equivalent punishment to the fine has expired. The total period of confinement so adjudged shall not exceed the jurisdictional limitations of the court- martial;”
f. R.C.M. 1003(b)(7) is amended to read as follows:
“(7) Confinement. The place of confinement shall not be designated by the court-martial. When confinement for life is authorized, it may be with or without eligibility for parole. A court-martial shall not adjudge a sentence to solitary confinement or to confinement without hard labor;”.
g. R.C.M. 1004(e) is amended to read as follows:
“(e) Other penalties. Except for a violation of Article 106, when death is an authorized punishment for an offense, all other punishments authorized under R.C.M. 1003 are also authorized for that offense, including Start Printed Page 18775confinement for life, with or without eligibility for parole, and may be adjudged in lieu of the death penalty, subject to limitations specifically prescribed in this Manual. A sentence of death includes a dishonorable discharge or dismissal as appropriate. Confinement is a necessary incident of a sentence of death, but not a part of it.”
h. R.C.M. 1006(d)(4)(B) is amended to read as follows:
“(B) Confinement for life, with or without eligibility for parole, or more than 10 years. A sentence that includes confinement for life, with or without eligibility for parole, or more than 10 years may be adjudged only if at least three-fourths of the members present vote for that sentence.”
i. R.C.M. 1009(e)(3)(B)(ii) is amended to read as follows:
“(ii) In the case of a sentence which includes confinement for life, with or without eligibility for parole, or more than 10 years, more than one-fourth of the members vote to reconsider; or”.
j. R.C.M. 1103(b)(2)(B)(i) is amended to read as follows:
“(i) Any part of the sentence adjudged exceeds six months confinement, forfeiture of pay greater than two-thirds pay per month, or any forfeiture of pay for more than six months or other punishments that may be adjudged by a special court-martial; or”.
k. R.C.M. 1103(c) is amended to read as follows:
“(c) Special courts-martial.
“(1) Involving a bad-conduct discharge, confinement for more than six months, or forfeiture of pay for more than six months. The requirements of subsections (b)(1), (b)(2)(A), (b)(2)(B), (b)(2)(D), and (b)(3) of this rule shall apply in a special court-martial in which a bad-conduct discharge, confinement for more than six months, or forfeiture of pay for more than six months, has been adjudged.
“(2) All other special courts-martial. If the special court-martial resulted in findings of guilty but a bad-conduct discharge, confinement for more than six months, or forfeiture of pay for more than six months, was not adjudged, the requirements of subsections (b)(1), (b)(2)(D), and (b)(3)(A)-(F) and (I)-(M) of this rule shall apply.”.
l. R.C.M. 1103(f)(1) is amended to read as follows:
“(1) Approve only so much of the sentence that could be adjudged by a special court-martial, except that a bad-conduct discharge, confinement for more than six months, or forfeiture of two-thirds pay per month for more than six months, may not be approved; or”.
m. R.C.M. 1104(a)(2)(A) is amended to read as follows:
“(A) Authentication by the military judge. In special courts-martial in which a bad-conduct discharge, confinement for more than six months, or forfeiture of pay for more than six months, has been adjudged and in general courts-martial, except as provided in subsection (a)(2)(B) of this rule, the military judge present at the end of the proceedings shall authenticate the record of trial, or that portion over which the military judge presided. If more than one military judge presided over the proceedings, each military judge shall authenticate the record of the proceedings over which that military judge presided, except as provided in subsection (a)(2)(B) of this rule. The record of trial of special courts-martial in which a bad-conduct discharge, confinement for more than six months, or forfeiture of pay for more than six months, was not adjudged shall be authenticated in accordance with regulations of the Secretary concerned.”
n. R.C.M. 1104(e) is amended to read as follows:
“(e) Forwarding. After every court-martial, including a rehearing and new and other trials, the authenticated record shall be forwarded to the convening authority for initial review and action, provided that in case of a special court-martial in which a bad-conduct discharge or confinement for one year was adjudged or a general court-martial, the convening authority shall refer the record to the staff judge advocate or legal officer for Start Printed Page 18776recommendation under R.C.M. 1106 before the convening authority takes action.”.
o. R.C.M. 1106(a) is amended to read as follows:
“(a) In general. Before the convening authority takes action under R.C.M. 1107 on a record of trial by general court-martial or a record of trial by special court-martial that includes a sentence to a bad-conduct discharge or confinement for one year, that convening authority's staff judge advocate or legal officer shall, except as provided in subsection (c) of this rule, forward to the convening authority a recommendation under this rule.”.
p. R.C.M. 1107(d)(4) is amended to read as follows:
“(4) Limitations on sentence based on record of trial. If the record of trial does not meet the requirements of R.C.M. 1103(b)(2)(B) or (c)(1), the convening authority may not approve a sentence in excess of that which may be adjudged by a special court-martial, or one that includes a bad-conduct discharge, confinement for more than six months, forfeiture of pay exceeding two-thirds pay per month, or any forfeiture of pay for more than six months.”.
q. R.C.M. 1107(d) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“(5) Limitations on sentence of a special court-martial where a fine has been adjudged. A convening authority may not approve in its entirety a sentence adjudged at a special court-martial when, if approved, the cumulative impact of the fine and forfeitures, whether adjudged or by operation of Article 58b, would exceed the jurisdictional maximum dollar amount of forfeitures that may be adjudged at that court-martial.”.
r. R.C.M. 1109(e) and (e)(1) are amended to read as follows:
“(e) Vacation of a suspended special court-martial sentence wherein a bad-conduct discharge or confinement for one year was not adjudged.
“(1) In general. Before vacating the suspension of a special court-martial punishment that does not include a bad-conduct discharge or confinement for one year, the special court-martial convening authority for the command in which the probationer is serving or assigned shall cause a hearing to be held on the alleged violation(s) of the conditions of suspension.”.
s. R.C.M. 1109(f) and (f)(1) are amended to read as follows:
“(f) Vacation of a suspended special court-martial sentence that includes a bad-conduct discharge or confinement for one year.
“(1) The procedure for the vacation of a suspended approved bad-conduct discharge or of any suspended portion of an approved sentence to confinement for one year, shall follow that set forth in subsection (d) of this rule.”.
t. R.C.M. 1110(a) is amended to read as follows:
“(a) In general. After any general court-martial, except one in which the approved sentence includes death, and after any special court-martial in which the approved sentence includes a bad-conduct discharge or confinement for one year, the accused may waive or withdraw appellate review.”.
u. R.C.M. 1111(b) is amended to read as follows:
“(1) Cases including an approved bad-conduct discharge or confinement for one year. If the approved sentence of a special court-martial includes a bad-conduct discharge or confinement for one year, the record shall be disposed of as provided in subsection (a) of this rule.
“(2) Other cases. The record of trial by a special court-martial in which the approved sentence does not include a bad-conduct discharge or confinement for one year shall be forwarded directly to a judge advocate for review under R.C.M. 1112. Four copies of the order promulgating the result of trial shall be forwarded with the record of trial, unless otherwise prescribed by regulations of the Secretary concerned.”.Start Printed Page 18777
v. R.C.M. 1112(a)(2) is amended to read as follows:
“(2) Each special court-martial in which the accused has waived or withdrawn appellate review under R.C.M. 1110 or in which the approved sentence does not include a bad-conduct discharge or confinement for one year; and”.
w. R.C.M 1305(d)(2) is amended to read as follows:
“(2) Forwarding to the convening authority. The original and one copy of the record of trial shall be forwarded to the convening authority after compliance with subsection (d)(1) of this rule.”.
Sec. 4. Part III of the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, is amended in Mil. R. Evid. 615 by striking the period at the end of the rule and adding “, or (4) a person authorized by statute to be present at courts-martial, or (5) any victim of an offense from the trial of an accused for that offense because such victim may testify or present any information in relation to the sentence or that offense during the presentencing proceedings.”.
Sec. 5. Part IV of the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, is amended as follows:
a. All “Sample specification(s)” subparagraphs in the Punitive Articles (Part IV, M.C.M.) are amended by striking “_______ 19__” and inserting “_______ 20__.”.
b. Paragraph 27e(1)(a) is amended to read as follows:
“(a) of a value of $500.00 or less. Bad-conduct discharge, forfeiture of all pay and allowances, and confinement for 6 months.”.
c. Paragraph 27e(1)(b) is amended to read as follows:
“(b) of a value of more than $500.00 or any firearm or explosive. Dishonorable discharge, forfeiture of all pay and allowances, and confinement for 5 years.”.
d. Paragraph 27f(3) is amended to read as follows:
“(3) Dealing in captured or abandoned property. In that _____ (personal jurisdiction data), did, (at/on board - location), on or about _____ 20 _____, (buy) (sell) (trade) (deal in) (dispose of) (________) certain (captured) (abandoned) property, to wit: _____, (a firearm) (an explosive), of a value of (about) $_____, thereby (receiving) (expecting) a (profit) (benefit) (advantage) to (himself/herself) (_____, his/her accomplice) (_____, his/her brother) (________).”.
e. Strike paragraph 31c(6).
f. Paragraph 43e(1), is amended to read as follows:
“(1) Article 118(1) or (4)—death. Mandatory minimum—imprisonment for life with eligibility for parole.”.
g. Paragraph 45e(3) is amended to read as follows:
“(3) Carnal knowledge with a child under the age of 12 years at the time of the offense. Dishonorable discharge, forfeiture of all pay and allowances, and confinement for life without eligibility for parole.”.
h. Paragraph 46c(1)(h) is amended by adding at the end the following new clause:
“(vi) Credit, Debit, and Electronic Transactions. Wrongfully engaging in a credit, debit, or electronic transaction to obtain goods or money is an obtaining- type larceny by false pretense. Such use to obtain goods is usually a larceny of those goods from the merchant offering them. Such use to obtain money or a negotiable instrument (e.g., withdrawing cash from an automated teller or a cash advance from a bank) is usually a larceny of money from the entity presenting the money or a negotiable instrument. For the purpose of this section, the term 'credit, debit, or electronic transaction' includes the use of an instrument or device, whether known as a credit card, debit card, automated teller machine (ATM) card or by any other name, including access devices such as code, account Start Printed Page 18778number, electronic serial number or personal identification number, issued for the use in obtaining money, goods, or anything else of value.”.
i. Paragraph 51e(1) is amended to read as follows:
“(1) By force and without consent. Dishonorable discharge, forfeiture of all pay and allowances, and confinement for life without eligibility for parole.”.
j. Paragraph 51e(3) is amended to read as follows:
“(3) With a child under the age of 12 years at the time of the offense. Dishonorable discharge, forfeiture of all pay and allowances, and confinement for life without eligibility for parole.”
k. Paragraph 62c is amended to read as follows:
“c. Explanation.
“(1) Nature of offense. Adultery is clearly unacceptable conduct, and it reflects adversely on the service record of the military member.
“(2) Conduct prejudicial to good order and discipline or of a nature to bring discredit upon the armed forces. To constitute an offense under the UCMJ, the adulterous conduct must either be directly prejudicial to good order and discipline or service discrediting. Adulterous conduct that is directly prejudicial includes conduct that has an obvious, and measurably divisive effect on unit or organization discipline, morale, or cohesion, or is clearly detrimental to the authority or stature of or respect toward a servicemember. Adultery may also be service discrediting, even though the conduct is only indirectly or remotely prejudicial to good order and discipline. Discredit means to injure the reputation of the armed forces and includes adulterous conduct that has a tendency, because of its open or notorious nature, to bring the service into disrepute, make it subject to public ridicule, or lower it in public esteem. While adulterous conduct that is private and discreet in nature may not be service discrediting by this standard, under the circumstances, it may be determined to be conduct prejudicial to good order and discipline. Commanders should consider all relevant circumstances, including but not limited to the following factors, when determining whether adulterous acts are prejudicial to good order and discipline or are of a nature to bring discredit upon the armed forces:
“(a) The accused's marital status, military rank, grade, or position;
“(b) The co-actor's marital status, military rank, grade, and position, or relationship to the armed forces;
“(c) The military status of the accused's spouse or the spouse of co-actor, or their relationship to the armed forces;
“(d) The impact, if any, of the adulterous relationship on the ability of the accused, the co-actor, or the spouse of either to perform their duties in support of the armed forces;
“(e) The misuse, if any, of government time and resources to facilitate the commission of the conduct;
“(f) Whether the conduct persisted despite counseling or orders to desist; the flagrancy of the conduct, such as whether any notoriety ensued; and whether the adulterous act was accompanied by other violations of the UCMJ;
“(g) The negative impact of the conduct on the units or organizations of the accused, the co-actor or the spouse of either of them, such as a detrimental effect on unit or organization morale, teamwork, and efficiency;
“(h) Whether the accused or co-actor was legally separated; and
“(i) Whether the adulterous misconduct involves an ongoing or recent relationship or is remote in time.
“(3) Marriage. A marriage exists until it is dissolved in accordance with the laws of a competent state or foreign jurisdiction.Start Printed Page 18779
“(4) Mistake of fact. A defense of mistake of fact exists if the accused had an honest and reasonable belief either that the accused and the co-actor were both unmarried, or that they were lawfully married to each other. If this defense is raised by the evidence, then the burden of proof is upon the United States to establish that the accused's belief was unreasonable or not honest.”.
l. Paragraph 92e is amended to read as follows:
“e. Maximum punishment. Dishonorable discharge, forfeiture of all pay and allowances, and confinement for life without eligibility for parole.”.
m. Paragraphs 32e, 33e, 46c(1)(g)(iii), 46e, 49e, 52e, 58e, 78e and 106e are amended by striking “$100.00” each place it appears and inserting “$500.00”.
Sec. 6. These amendments shall take effect on May 15, 2002.
a. The amendments made to Rules for Courts-Martial 806(d) and 1001(b)(3)(A) shall only apply in cases in which arraignment has been completed on or after May 15, 2002.
b. The amendments made to Rules for Courts- Martial 1003(b)(7), 1004(e), 1006(d)(4)(B), and 1009(e)(3)(B)(ii) shall only apply to offenses committed after November 18, 1997. In cases not involving these amendments, the maximum punishment for an offense committed prior to May 15, 2002, shall not exceed the applicable maximum in effect at the time of the commission of such offense. Provided further, that for offenses committed prior to May 15, 2002, for which a sentence is adjudged on or after May 15, 2002, if the maximum punishment authorized in this Manual is less than that previously authorized, the lesser maximum authorized punishment shall apply.
c. The amendment made to Military Rules of Evidence 615 shall apply only in cases in which arraignment has been completed on or after May 15, 2002.
d. Nothing in these amendments shall be construed to make punishable any act done or omitted prior to May 15, 2002, that was not punishable when done or omitted.
e. Nothing in these amendments shall be construed to invalidate any nonjudicial punishment proceeding, restraint, investigation, referral of charges, trial in which arraignment occurred, or other action begun prior to May 15, 2002, and any such nonjudicial punishment, restraint, investigation, referral of charges, trial, or other action may proceed in the same manner and with the same effect as if these amendments had not been prescribed.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
April 11, 2002.
Start Printed Page 18780
CHANGES TO THE DISCUSSION ACCOMPANYING THE MANUAL FOR COURTS-MARTIAL, UNITED STATES
a. The Discussion following the Preamble is amended by adding the following at the end of the Discussion:
“The amendment to paragraph 4 of the Preamble is intended to address the possibility of more frequent amendments to the Manual and the arrival of the 21st century. In the event that multiple editions of the Manual are published in the same year, the numbering and lettering of the edition should match that of the most recent Executive Order included in the publication.”
b. The seventh paragraph of the Discussion following R.C.M. 601(e)(1) is amended to read as follows:
“The convening authority should acknowledge by an instruction that a bad-conduct discharge, confinement for more than six months, or forfeiture of pay for more than six months, may not be adjudged when the prerequisites under Article 19 will not be met. See R.C.M. 201(f)(2)(B)(ii). For example, this instruction should be given when a court reporter is not detailed.”.
c. The Discussion following R.C.M. 701(a)(2)(B) is amended to read as follows:
“For specific rules concerning certain mental examinations of the accused or third party patients, see R.C.M. 701(f), R.C.M. 706, Mil. R. Evid. 302, and Mil. R. Evid. 513.”
d. The ninth paragraph of the Discussion following R.C.M. 806(b) is amended to read as follows:
“There are other methods of protecting the proceedings from harmful effects of publicity, including a thorough voir dire (see R.C.M. 912), and, if necessary, a continuance to allow the harmful effects of publicity to dissipate. See R.C.M. 906(b)(1). Other methods that may occasionally be appropriate and which are usually preferable to closing a session include: directing members not to read, listen to, or watch any accounts concerning the case; issuing a protective order under R.C.M. 806(d); and selecting members from recent arrivals in the command, or from outside the immediate area. See R.C.M. 503(a)(3). In more extreme cases, the place of trial may be changed (see R.C.M. 906(b)(11), or members may be sequestered.
e. The following Discussion is added after R.C.M. 806(d):
“A protective order may proscribe extrajudicial statements by counsel, parties, and witnesses that might divulge prejudicial matter not of public record in the case. Other appropriate matters may also be addressed by such a protective order. Before issuing a protective order, the military judge must consider whether other available remedies would effectively mitigate the adverse effects that any publicity might create, and consider such an order's likely effectiveness in ensuring an impartial court-martial panel. A military judge should not issue a protective order without first providing notice to the parties and an opportunity to be heard. The military judge must state on the record the reasons for issuing the protective order. If the reasons for issuing the order change, the military judge may reconsider the continued necessity for a protective order.”
f. The first paragraph of the Discussion following R.C.M. 808 is amended to read as follows:
“Except in a special court-martial not authorized to adjudge a bad-conduct discharge, confinement for more than six months, or forfeiture of pay for more than six months, the trial counsel should ensure that a qualified court reporter is detailed to the court-martial. Trial counsel should also ensure that all exhibits and other documents relating to the case are properly maintained for later inclusion in the record. See also R.C.M. 1103(j) as to the use of videotapes, audiotapes, and similar recordings for the record of trial. Because of the potential requirement for a verbatim transcript, all proceedings, including sidebar conferences, arguments, and rulings and instructions by the military judge, should be recorded.”Start Printed Page 18781
g. The Discussion following R.C.M. 1001(b)(3)(A) is amended by adding the following at the end of the Discussion:
“Whether a civilian conviction is admissible is left to the discretion of the military judge. As stated in the rule, a civilian “conviction” includes any disposition following an initial judicial determination or assumption of guilt regardless of the sentencing procedure and the final judgment following probation or other sentence. Therefore, convictions may be admissible regardless of whether a court ultimately suspended judgment upon discharge of the accused following probation, permitted withdrawal of the guilty plea, or applies some other form of alternative sentencing. Additionally, the term “conviction” need not be taken to mean a final judgment of conviction and sentence.”
h. The sixth paragraph of the Discussion following R.C.M. 1003(b)(2) is amended to read as follows:
“At a special court-martial, if a bad-conduct discharge and confinement are adjudged, then the operation of Article 58b results in a forfeiture of two-thirds of pay only (not allowances) during that period of confinement. If only confinement is adjudged, and that confinement exceeds six months, then the operation of Article 58b results in a forfeiture of two-thirds of pay only (not allowances) during the period of confinement. If only a bad conduct discharge is adjudged, Article 58b has no effect on pay.”.
i. The Discussion following R.C.M. 1003(b)(3) is amended by adding at the end the following paragraph:
“Where the sentence adjudged at a special court-martial includes a fine, see R.C.M. 1107(d)(5) for limitations on convening authority action on the sentence.”
j. The Discussion following R.C.M. 1003(b)(8) is amended by adding the following at the end of the Discussion:
“See Article 56a.”
k. The Discussion following R.C.M. 1003(c)(4) is amended by striking “R.C.M. 1107(d)(3)” and inserting “R.C.M. 1107(d)(4).”
l. The Discussion following R.C.M. 1006(c) is amended to read as follows:
“A proposal should state completely each kind and, where appropriate, amount of authorized punishment proposed by that member. For example, a proposal of confinement for life would state whether it is with or without eligibility for parole. See R.C.M. 1003(b).”
m. The second paragraph of the Discussion following R.C.M. 1107(d)(1) is amended to read as follows:
“When mitigating forfeitures, the duration and amounts of forfeiture may be changed as long as the total amount forfeited is not increased and neither the amount nor duration of the forfeitures exceeds the jurisdiction of the court-martial. When mitigating confinement or hard labor without confinement, the convening authority should use the equivalencies at R.C.M. 1003(b)(6) and (7), as appropriate. One form of punishment may be changed to a less severe punishment of a different nature, as long as the changed punishment is one that the court-martial could have adjudged. For example, a bad-conduct discharge adjudged by a special court-martial could be changed to confinement for up to one year (but not vice versa). A pretrial agreement may also affect what punishments may be changed by the convening authority.”.
n. The Discussion following R.C.M. 1109(f) is amended to read as follows:
“An officer exercising special court-martial jurisdiction may vacate any suspended punishments other than an approved suspended bad-conduct discharge or any suspended portion of an approved sentence to confinement for one year, regardless of whether they are contained in the same sentence as the bad-conduct discharge or confinement for one year. See Appendix 18 for a sample of a Report of Proceedings to Vacate Suspension of a Special Court-Martial Sentence including a bad-conduct discharge or confinement for one year under Article 72, UCMJ, and R.C.M. 1109 (DD Form 455).”.Start Printed Page 18782
o. The Discussion following R.C.M. 1110(a) is amended to read as follows:
“Appellate review is not available for special courts-martial in which a bad-conduct discharge or confinement for one year was not adjudged or approved or for summary courts-martial. Cases not subject to appellate review, or in which appellate review is waived or withdrawn, are reviewed by a judge advocate under R.C.M. 1112. Such cases may also be submitted to the Judge Advocate General for review. See R.C.M. 1201(b)(3). Appellate review is mandatory when the approved sentence includes death.”.
CHANGES TO APPENDIX 8, GUIDE FOR GENERAL AND SPECIAL COURTS-MARTIAL, MANUAL FOR COURTS-MARTIAL, UNITED STATES
Appendix 8, is amended—
a. by amending the left margin entry to Note 100 to read as follows:
“Advice in GCMs and SPCMs in which BCD or confinement for one year is adjudged”;
b. by amending Note 100 to read as follows:
“[Note 100. In cases subject to review by a Court of Criminal Appeals, the following advice should be given. In other cases proceed to Note 101 or 102 as appropriate.]”;
c. by amending the left margin entry to Note 102 to read as follows:
“SPCM not involving a BCD or confinement for one year”; and
d. by amending Note 102 to read as follows:
[Note 102. In special courts-martial not involving BCD or confinement for one year, the following advice should be given.]”.
CHANGES TO THE MAXIMUM PUNISHMENT CHART OF THE MANUAL FOR COURTS-MARTIAL, UNITED STATES
Appendix 12, the Maximum Punishment Chart, is amended—
a. by striking the item relating to Article 103 and inserting:
“103 Captured, abandoned property; failure to secure, etc. Of value of $500.00 or less . . . . . BCD
6 mos. Total
Of value of more than $500.00 . DD, BCD
5 yrs. Total
Any firearm or explosive . . . . . . DD, BCD
5 yrs. Total
Looting, pillaging . . . . . . . . . . . . DD, BCD Life4 Total”; and
b. in the items relating to Articles 108, 109, 121, 123a, 126, 132, and 134 (False Pretenses, obtaining services under; and Stolen Property, knowingly receiving, buying, concealing), by striking “100.00” each place it appears and inserting “$500.00”.
CHANGES TO THE GUIDE FOR PREPARATION OF RECORD OF TRIAL WHEN A VERBATIM RECORD IS NOT REQUIRED, MANUAL FOR COURTS-MARTIAL, UNITED STATES
Appendix 13 is amended—
a. in the third subparagraph of paragraph a, by replacing “1-inch margin” with “one-inch margin” and replacing “left hand” with “left-hand”.
CHANGES TO THE GUIDE FOR PREPARATION OF RECORD OF TRIAL WHEN A VERBATIM RECORD IS REQUIRED, MANUAL FOR COURTS-MARTIAL, UNITED STATES
Appendix 14, is amended—
a. at page A14-6, by amending the second bracketed format under the third note to read as follows:
“[The (court-martial) (session) was (adjourned) (recessed) at ____ hours, ________.]”.
CHANGES TO APPENDIX 17, FORMS FOR COURT-MARTIAL ORDERS, MANUAL FOR COURTS-MARTIAL, UNITED STATES
Start Printed Page 18783
The first note to paragraph d of Appendix 17 is amended to read as follows:
“[Note. Orders promulgating the vacation of the suspension of a dismissal will be published by departmental orders of the Secretary concerned. Vacations of any other suspension of a general court-martial sentence, or of a special court-martial sentence that as approved and affirmed includes a bad-conduct discharge or confinement for one year, will be promulgated by the officer exercising general court-martial jurisdiction over the probationer (Article 72(b)). The vacation of suspension of any other sentence may be promulgated by an appropriate convening authority under Article 72(c). See R.C.M. 1109.]”
CHANGES TO APPENDIX 18, REPORT OF PROCEEDINGS TO VACATE SUSPENSION OF A GENERAL COURT-MARTIAL OR OF A SPECIAL COURT-MARTIAL SENTENCE INCLUDING A BAD-CONDUCT DISCHARGE UNDER ARTICLE 72, UCMJ, AND R.C.M. 1109 (DD FORM 455), MANUAL FOR COURTS-MARTIAL, UNITED STATES
The title to Appendix 18 is amended to read as follows:
“Report of Proceedings to Vacate Suspension of a General Court-Martial or of a Special Court-Martial Sentence Including a Bad-Conduct Discharge or Confinement for One Year Under Article 72, UCMJ, and R.C.M. 1109 (DD Form 455).”.
CHANGES TO THE ANALYSIS ACCOMPANYING THE MANUAL FOR COURTS-MARTIAL, UNITED STATES.
1. Changes to Appendix 21, the Analysis Accompanying the Rules for Courts- Martial, United States (Part II, MCM).
a. The Analysis to R.C.M. 201(f) is amended by inserting after the second paragraph the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: Subsections (f)(2)(B)(i) and (f)(2)(B)(ii) were amended to remove previous limitations and thereby implement the amendment to 10 U.S.C. § 819 (Article 19, UCMJ) contained in section 577 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000, P. L. No. 106-65, 113 Stat. 512 (1999). Subject to limitations prescribed by the President, the amendment increased the jurisdictional maximum punishment at special courts-martial to confinement for one year and forfeitures not exceeding two-thirds pay per month for one year, vice the previous six-month jurisdictional limitation.”.
b. The Analysis to R.C.M. 701(b) is amended by inserting after the discussion of the 1991 Amendment to subsection (b)(2) the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: Subsection (b)(4) was amended to take into consideration the protections afforded by the new psychotherapist-patient privilege under Mil. R. Evid. 513.”
c. The Analysis to R.C.M. 707(a) is amended by inserting after the second paragraph the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: Burton and its progeny were re-examined in United States v. Kossman, 38 M.J. 258 (C.M.A. 1993), where the Court of Military Appeals specifically overruled Burton and reinstated the earlier rule from United States v. Tibbs, 15 C.M.A. 350, 353, 35 C.M.R. 322, 325 (1965). See Kossman, 38 M.J. at 262. In Kossman, the Court reinstated the “reasonable diligence” standard in determining whether the prosecution's progress toward trial for a confined accused was sufficient to satisfy the speedy trial requirement of Article 10, UCMJ.”
d. The Analysis accompanying R.C.M. 806 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
“2002 Amendment: Section (d) was added to codify the military judge's power to issue orders limiting trial participants' extrajudicial statements in appropriate cases. See United States v. Garwood, 16 M.J. 863, 868 (N-M.C.M.R. 1983) (finding military judge was justified in issuing restrictive order prohibiting extrajudicial statements by trial participants), aff'd on other grounds, 20 M.J. 148 (C.M.A. 1985), cert. denied, 474 U.S. 1005 (1985); Start Printed Page 18784
United States v. Clark, 31 M.J. 721, 724 (A.F.C.M.R. 1990) (suggesting, but not deciding, that the military judge properly limited trial participants' extrajudicial statements).
“The public has a legitimate interest in the conduct of military justice proceedings. Informing the public about the operations of the criminal justice system is one of the “core purposes” of the First Amendment. In the appropriate case where the military judge is considering issuing a protective order, absent exigent circumstances, the military judge must conduct a hearing prior to issuing such an order. Prior to such a hearing the parties will have been provided notice. At the hearing, all parties will be provided an opportunity to be heard. The opportunity to be heard may be extended to representatives of the media in the appropriate case.
“Section (d) is based on the first Recommendation Relating to the Conduct of Judicial Proceedings in Criminal Cases, included in the Revised Report of the Judicial Conference Committee on the Operation of the Jury System on the “Free Press—Fair Trial” Issue, 87 F.R.D. 519, 529 (1980), which was approved by the Judicial Conference of the United States on September 25, 1980. The requirement that the protective order be issued in writing is based on Rule for Courts-Martial 405(g)(6). Section (d) adopts a “substantial likelihood of material prejudice” standard in place of the Judicial Conference recommendation of a “likely to interfere” standard. The Judicial Conference's recommendation was issued before the Supreme Court's decision in Gentile v. State Bar of Nev., 501 U.S. 1030 (1991). Gentile, which dealt with a Rule of Professional Conduct governing extrajudicial statements, indicates that a lawyer may be disciplined for making statements that present a substantial likelihood of material prejudice to an accused's right to a fair trial. While the use of protective orders is distinguishable from limitations imposed by a bar's ethics rule, the Gentile decision expressly recognized that the “speech of lawyers representing clients in pending cases may be regulated under a less demanding standard than that established for regulation of the press in Nebraska Press Ass'n v. Stuart, 427 U.S. 539 (1976), and the cases which preceded it.” 501 U.S. at 1074. The Court concluded that “the `substantial likelihood of material prejudice' standard constitutes a constitutionally permissible balance between the First Amendment rights of attorneys in pending cases and the State's interest in fair trials.” Id. at 1075. Gentile also supports the constitutionality of restricting communications of non-lawyer participants in a court case. Id. at 1072-73 (citing Seattle Times Co. v. Rhinehart, 467 U.S. 20, 32-33 (1984)). Accordingly, a protective order issued under the “substantial likelihood of material prejudice” standard is constitutionally permissible.
“The first sentence of the discussion is based on the committee comment to the Recommendations Relating to the Conduct of Judicial Proceedings in Criminal Cases. See 87 F.R.D. at 530. For a definition of “party,” see R.C.M. 103(16). The second sentence of the discussion is based on the first of the Judicial Conference's recommendations concerning special orders. See 87 F.R.D. at 529. The third sentence of the discussion is based on the second of the Judicial Conference's recommendations, id. at 532, and on United States v. Salameh, 992 F.2d 445, 447 (2d Cir. 1993) (per curiam), and In re Application of Dow Jones & Co., 842 F.2d 603, 611 & n.1 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 488 U.S. 946 (1988). The fourth sentence is based on Salameh, 992 F.2d at 447. The fifth sentence is based on Rule for Courts-Martial 905(d).”.
e. The Analysis accompanying R.C.M. 1001(b)(3)(A) is amended by inserting the following at the end thereof:
“2002 Amendment: As previously written, R.C.M. 1001(b)(3)(A) offered little guidance about what it meant by “civilian convictions.” See, e.g., United States v. White, 47 M.J. 139, 140 (C.A.A.F. 1997); United States v. Barnes, 33 M.J. 468, 472-73 (C.M.A. 1992); United States v. Slovacek, 24 M.J. 140, 141 (CMA), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 855 (1987). The present rule addresses this void and intends to give the sentencing authority as Start Printed Page 18785much information as the military judge determines is relevant in order to craft an appropriate sentence for the accused.
“Unlike most civilian courts, this rule does not allow admission of more extensive criminal history information, such as arrests. Use of such additional information is not appropriate in the military setting where court-martial members, not a military judge, often decide the sentence. Such information risks unnecessarily confusing the members.
“The present rule clarifies the term “conviction” in light of the complex and varying ways civilian jurisdictions treat the subject. The military judge may admit relevant evidence of civilian convictions without necessarily being bound by the action, procedure, or nomenclature of civilian jurisdictions. Examples of judicial determinations admissible as convictions under this rule include accepted pleas of nolo contendere, pleas accepted under North Carolina v. Alford, 400 U.S. 25 (1970), or deferred sentences. If relevant, evidence of forfeiture of bail that results in a judicial determination of guilt is also admissible, as recognized in United States v. Eady, 35 M.J. 15, 16 (C.M.A. 1992). While no time limit is placed upon the admissibility of prior convictions, the military judge should conduct a balancing test to determine whether convictions older than ten years should be admitted or excluded on the basis of relevance and fundamental fairness.
“The two central factors in this rule are (1) judicial determination of guilt and (2) assumption of guilt. Assumption of guilt is an all-inclusive term meaning any act by the accused in a judicial proceeding accepting, acknowledging, or admitting guilt. As long as either factor is present, the “conviction” is admissible, if relevant. Consequently, this rule departs from the holding in United States v. Hughes, 26 M.J. 119, 120 (C.M.A. 1988), where the accused pleaded guilty in a Texas court, but the judge did not enter a finding of guilty under state law allowing “deferred adjudications.” Under the present rule, the “conviction” would be admissible because the accused pleaded guilty in a judicial proceeding, notwithstanding the fact that the state judge did not enter a finding of guilty.
“In contrast, “deferred prosecutions,” where there is neither an admission of guilt in a judicial proceeding nor a finding of guilty, would be excluded. The rule also excludes expunged convictions, juvenile adjudications, minor traffic violations, foreign convictions, and tribal court convictions as matters inappropriate for or unnecessarily confusing to courts-martial members. What constitutes a “minor traffic violation” within the meaning of this rule is to be decided with reference only to federal law, and not to the laws of individual states. See U.S. Sentencing Guidelines Manual § 4A1.2(c)(2); “What Constitutes `Minor Traffic Infraction' Excludable From Calculation of Defendant's Criminal History under United States Sentencing Guideline § 4A1.2(c)(2),” 113 A.L.R. Fed. 561 (1993).
“Additionally, because of the lack of clarity in the previous rule, courts sometimes turned to Mil. R. Evid. 609 for guidance. See, e.g., Slovacek, 24 M.J. at 141. We note that because the policies behind Mil. R. Evid. 609 and the present rule differ greatly, a conviction that may not be appropriate for impeachment purposes under Mil. R. Evid. 609, may nevertheless be admissible under the present rule.
“The Federal Sentencing Guidelines were consulted when drafting the present rule. Although informed by those guidelines, the present rule departs from them in many respects because of the wide differences between the courts-martial process and practice in federal district court.”.
f. The Analysis to R.C.M. 1003(b)(3) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: The amendment clearly defines the authority of special and summary courts-martial to adjudge both fines and forfeitures. See generally United States v. Tualla, 52 M.J. 228 (2000).”
g. The Analysis accompanying R.C.M. 1003(b)(7) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:Start Printed Page 18786
“2002 Amendment: This change resulted from the enactment of Article 56a, UCMJ, in section 581 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1998, Pub. L. No. 105-85, 111 Stat. 1629, 1759 (1997).”.
h. The Analysis accompanying R.C.M. 1004(e) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: This change resulted from the enactment of Article 56a, UCMJ, in section 581 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1998, Pub. L. No. 105-85, 111 Stat. 1629, 1759 (1997).”.
i. The Analysis accompanying R.C.M. 1006(c) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: This change to the discussion resulted from the enactment of Article 56a, UCMJ, in section 581 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1998, Pub. L. No. 105-85, 111 Stat. 1629, 1759 (1997).”.
j. The Analysis accompanying R.C.M. 1006(d) is amended by inserting after the analysis of subsection 3(A) following paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: Subsection (d)(4)(B) was amended as a result of the enactment of Article 56a, UCMJ, in section 581 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1998, Pub. L. No. 105-85, 111 Stat. 1629, 1759 (1997).”.
k. The Analysis accompanying R.C.M. 1009 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: Subsection (e)(3)(B)(ii) was amended as a result of the enactment of Article 56a, UCMJ, in section 581 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1998, Pub. L. No. 105-85, 111 Stat. 1629, 1759 (1997).”.
l. The Analysis to R.C.M. 1103 (b)(2) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: Subsection (b)(2)(B) was amended to implement the amendment to 10 U.S.C. § 819 (Article 19, UCMJ) contained in section 577 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000, P. L. No. 106-65, 113 Stat. 512 (1999) increasing the jurisdictional maximum punishment at special courts-martial. R.C.M. 1103(b)(2)(B) was amended to prevent an inconsistent requirement for a verbatim transcript between a general court-martial and a special court-martial when the adjudged sentence of a general court-martial does not include a punitive discharge or confinement greater than six months, but does include forfeiture of two-thirds pay per month for more than six months but not more than 12 months.”.
m. The Analysis to R.C.M. 1103(c) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: Subsection (c) was amended to implement the amendment to 10 U.S.C. § 819 (Article 19, UCMJ) contained in section 577 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000, P. L. No. 106-65, 113 Stat. 512 (1999) increasing the jurisdictional maximum punishment at special courts-martial. R.C.M. 1103(c) was amended to conform the requirements for a verbatim transcript with the requirements of Article 19 for a 'complete record' in cases where the adjudged sentence includes a bad-conduct discharge, confinement for more than six months, or forfeiture of pay for more than six months.”.
n. The Analysis to R.C.M. 1103(f) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: Subsection (f)(1) was amended to implement the amendment to 10 U.S.C. § 819 (Article 19, UCMJ) contained in section 577 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000, P. L. No. 106§65, 113 Stat. 512 (1999) increasing the jurisdictional maximum punishment at special courts-martial. R.C.M. 1103(f)(1) was amended to include the additional limitations on sentence contained in Article 19, UCMJ.”.Start Printed Page 18787
o. The Analysis to R.C.M. 1104(a) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: Subsection (a)(2)(A) was amended to implement the amendment to 10 U.S.C. § 819 (Article 19, UCMJ) contained in section 577 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000, P. L. No. 106-65, 113 Stat. 512 (1999) increasing the jurisdictional maximum punishment at special courts-martial. R.C.M. 1104(a)(2)(A) was amended to ensure that the military judge authenticates all verbatim records of trial at special courts-martial.”.
p. The Analysis to R.C.M. 1104(e) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: Subsection (e) was amended to implement the amendment to 10 U.S.C. § 819 (Article 19, UCMJ) contained in section 577 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000, P. L. No. 106-65, 113 Stat. 512 (1999) increasing the jurisdictional maximum punishment at special courts-martial. This amendment reflects the change to R.C.M. 1106 for special court- martial with an adjudged sentence that includes confinement for one year.”.
q. The Analysis to R.C.M. 1106(a) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: Subsection (a) was amended to implement the amendment to 10 U.S.C. § 819 (Article 19, UCMJ) contained in section 577 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000, P. L. No. 106-65, 113 Stat. 512 (1999) increasing the jurisdictional maximum punishment at special courts-martial. This amendment requires all special courts-martial cases subject to appellate review to comply with this rule.”.
r. The Analysis to R.C.M. 1107(d) is amended by inserting after the first paragraph the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: The Discussion accompanying subsection (d)(1) was amended to implement the amendment to 10 U.S.C. § 819 (Article 19, UCMJ) contained in section 577 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000, P. L. No. 106-65, 113 Stat. 512 (1999) increasing the jurisdictional maximum punishment at special courts-martial. R.C.M. 1107(d)(4) was amended to include the additional limitations on sentence contained in Article 19, UCMJ.”.
s. The Analysis accompanying R.C.M. 1107(d) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
“2002 Amendment: Subsection (d)(4) was amended as a result of the enactment of Article 56a, UCMJ, in section 581 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1998, Pub. L. No. 105-85, 111 Stat. 1629, 1759 (1997).
“Subsection (d)(5) is new. The amendment addresses the impact of Article 58b, UCMJ. In special courts-martial, where the cumulative impact of a fine and forfeitures, whether adjudged or by operation of Article 58b, would otherwise exceed the total dollar amount of forfeitures that could be adjudged at the special court-martial, the fine and/or adjudged forfeitures should be disapproved or decreased accordingly. See generally United States v. Tualla, 52 M.J. 228, 231-32 (2000).”
t. The Analysis to R.C.M. 1109 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
“2002 Amendment: Subsection (e) was amended to implement the amendment to 10 U.S.C. § 819 (Article 19, UCMJ) contained in section 577 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000, P. L. No. 106-65, 113 Stat. 512 (1999) increasing the jurisdictional maximum punishment at special courts-martial.
“(f) Vacation of a suspended special court-martial sentence that includes a bad-conduct discharge or confinement for one year. Subsection (f) was amended to implement the amendment to 10 U.S.C. §thnsp;819 (Article 19, UCMJ) contained in section 577 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000, P. L. No. 106-65, 113 Stat. 512 (1999) increasing Start Printed Page 18788the jurisdictional maximum punishment at special courts-martial. This amendment reflects the decision to treat an approved sentence of confinement for one year, regardless of whether any period of confinement is suspended, as a serious offense, in the same manner as a suspended approved bad-conduct discharge at special courts-martial under Article 72, UCMJ, and R.C.M. 1109.”.
u. The Analysis to R.C.M. 1110(a) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: Subsection (a) was amended to implement the amendment to 10 U.S.C. § 819 (Article 19, UCMJ) contained in section 577 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000, P. L. No. 106-65, 113 Stat. 512 (1999) increasing the jurisdictional maximum punishment at special courts-martial.”.
v. The Analysis to R.C.M. 1111 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: R.C.M. 1111(b) was amended to implement the amendment to 10 U.S.C. § 819 (Article 19, UCMJ) contained in section 577 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000, P. L. No. 106-65, 113 Stat. 512 (1999) increasing the jurisdictional maximum punishment at special courts-martial. The amendment ensures all special courts-martial not requiring appellate review are reviewed by a judge advocate under R.C.M. 1112.”.
w. The Analysis to R.C.M. 1112 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: R.C.M. 1112(a)(2) was amended to implement the amendment to 10 U.S.C. § 819 (Article 19, UCMJ) contained in section 577 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000, P. L. No. 106-65, 113 Stat. 512 (1999) increasing the jurisdictional maximum punishment at special courts-martial. The amendment ensures all special courts-martial not requiring appellate review are reviewed by a judge advocate under R.C.M. 1112.”.
x. The Analysis to R.C.M. 1305 (d) is amended to read as follows:
“(d) Forwarding copies of the record. Subsection (1) is based on Article 60(b)(2). Subsection (2) is based on the third paragraph of paragraph 91c of MCM, 1969 (Rev.). Subsection (3) is self- explanatory.
“2001 Amendment: Subsection (d)(2) was amended to strike the reference to “subsection (e)(1)” and insert a reference to “subsection (d)(1)” to reflect the 1995 amendment that redesignated R.C.M. 1305(e) as R.C.M. 1305(d).”.
2.
Changes to Appendix 22, the Analysis Accompanying the Military Rules of Evidence (Part III, MCM).
a. The Analysis to Mil. R. Evid. 413 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: Federal Rule of Evidence 415 which created a similar character evidence rule for civil cases, became applicable to the Military Rules of Evidence on January 6, 1996, pursuant to Rule 1102. Federal Rule 415, however, is no longer applicable to the Military Rules of Evidence, as stated in Section 1 of Executive Order , 2002 Amendments to the Manual for Court-Martial, United States, (date) Rule 415 was deleted because it applies only to federal civil proceedings.”.
b. The Analysis to Mil. R. Evid. 414 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: Federal Rule of Evidence 415 which created a similar character evidence rule for civil cases, became applicable to the Military Rules of Evidence on January 6, 1996, pursuant to Rule 1102. Federal Rule 415, however, is no longer applicable to the Military Rules of Evidence, as stated in Section 1 of Executive Order , 2002 Amendments to the Manual for Court-Martial, United States, (date) Rule 415 was deleted because it applies only to federal civil proceedings.”
c. The analysis to Mil. R. Evid. 615 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:Start Printed Page 18789
“2002 Amendment: These changes are intended to extend to victims at courts-martial the same rights granted to victims by the Victims' Rights and Restitution Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C. § 10606(b)(4), giving crime victims '[t]he right to be present at all public court proceedings related to the offense, unless the court determines that testimony by the victim would be materially affected if the victim heard other testimony at trial,' and the Victim Rights Clarification Act of 1997, 18 U.S.C. § 3510, which is restated in subsection (5). For the purposes of this rule, the term 'victim' includes all persons defined as victims in 42 U.S.C. § 10607(e)(2), which means 'a person that has suffered direct physical, emotional, or pecuniary harm as a result of the commission of a crime, including'—(A) in the case of a victim that is an institutional entity, an authorized representative of the entity; and (B) in the case of a victim who is under 18 years of age, incompetent, incapacitated, or deceased, one of the following (in order of preference): (i) a spouse; (ii) a legal guardian; (iii) a parent; (iv) a child; (v) a sibling; (vi) another family member; or (vii) another person designated by the court. 'The victim's right to remain in the courtroom remains subject to other rules, such as those regarding classified information, witness deportment, and conduct in the courtroom. Subsection (4) is intended to capture only those statutes applicable to courts-martial.”.
3. Changes to Appendix 23, the Analysis accompanying the Punitive Articles (Part IV, MCM).
a. The Analysis to paragraph 27(e) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: The monetary amount affecting the maximum punishments has been revised from $100 to $500 to account for inflation. The last change was in 1969 raising the amount to $100. The value has also been readjusted to realign it more closely with the division between felony and misdemeanor penalties in civilian jurisdictions. See generally American Law Institute, Model Penal Code and Commentaries § 223.1 (1980) (suggesting $500 as the value). The amendment also adds the phrase 'or any firearm or explosive' as an additional criterion. This is because, regardless of the intrinsic value of such items, the threat to the community is substantial when such items are wrongfully bought, sold, traded, dealt in or disposed.”.
b. The Analysis to paragraph 31(c)(6) is amended to read as follows:
“2002 Amendment: Subparagraph c(6), 'Statements made during an interrogation,' was removed in light of questions raised by the Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces in United States v. Solis, 46 M.J. 31, 35 (C.A.A.F. 1997). In Solis, the court said subparagraph c(6) could be viewed as serving at least three different purposes. It could be (1) an expansive description of dicta with no intent to limit prosecutions; (2) protection for an accused against overcharging; or (3) guidance for the conduct of investigations. Subparagraph c(6) was never intended to establish either procedural rights for an accused or internal guidelines to regulate government conduct. Subparagraph (c)(6) was based upon United States v. Aronson, 8 U.S.C.M.A. 525, 25 C.M.R. 29 (1957); United States v. Washington, 9 U.S.C.M.A. 131, 25 C.M.R. 393 (1958) and United States v. Davenport, 9 M.J. 364 (C.M.A. 1980) and was intended merely to describe the rule developed in those cases that a false statement to a law enforcement agent, when made by a servicemember without an independent duty to speak, was not 'official' and therefore not within the purview of Article 107. The subparagraph is removed because the position of the Court of Military Appeals in the three decisions noted above was abandoned in United States v. Jackson, 26 M.J. 377 (C.M.A. 1988) and the deleted paragraph no longer accurately describes the current state of the law.”.
c. The Analysis to paragraph 32(e) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: The monetary amount affecting the maximum punishments has been revised from $100 to $500 to account for inflation. The last change was in 1969 raising the amount to $100. The value has also been readjusted to realign it more closely with the division between felony Start Printed Page 18790and misdemeanor penalties in civilian jurisdictions. See generally American Law Institute, Model Penal Code and Commentaries § 223.1 (1980) (suggesting $500 as the value). Although the monetary amount affecting punishment in 18 U.S.C. § 1361, Government property or contracts, and 18 U.S.C. § 641, Public money, property or records, was increased from $100 to $1000 pursuant to section 606 of the Economic Espionage Act of 1996, P. L. No. 104-294, 110 Stat. 3488 (1996), a value of $500 was chosen to maintain deterrence, simplicity, and uniformity for the Manual's property offenses.”.
d. The Analysis to paragraph 33(e) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: The monetary amount affecting the maximum punishments has been revised from $100 to $500 to account for inflation. The last change was in 1969 raising the amount to $100. The value has also been readjusted to realign it more closely with the division between felony and misdemeanor penalties in civilian jurisdictions. See generally American Law Institute, Model Penal Code and Commentaries § 223.1 (1980) (suggesting $500 as the value).”.
e. The Analysis to paragraph 46(c) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: Subparagraph c(1)(h)(vi) is new. It was added to provide guidance on how unauthorized credit, debit, or electronic transactions should usually be charged. See United States v. Duncan, 30 M.J. 1284, 289 (N.M.C.M.R. 1990) (citing United States v. Jones, 29 C.M.R. 651 (A.B.R. 1960), petition denied, 30 C.M.R. 417 (C.M.A. 1960)) (regarding thefts from ATM machines). Alternative charging theories are also available, see United States v. Leslie, 13 M.J. 170 (C.M.A. 1982); United States v. Ragins, 11 M.J. 42 (C.M.A. 1981); United States v. Schaper, 42 M.J. 737 (A.F. Ct. Crim. App. 1995); and United States v. Christy, 18 M.J. 688 (N.M.C.M.R. 1984). The key under Article 121 is that the accused wrongfully obtained goods or money from a person or entity with a superior possessory interest.”.
f. The Analysis to paragraph 46(e) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: The monetary amount affecting the maximum punishments has been revised from $100 to $500 to account for inflation. The last change was in 1969 raising the amount to $100. The value has also been readjusted to realign it more closely with the division between felony and misdemeanor penalties in civilian jurisdictions. See generally American Law Institute, Model Penal Code and Commentaries § 223.1 (1980) (suggesting $500 as the value). Although the monetary amount effecting punishment in 18 U.S.C. § 1361, Government property or contracts, and 18 U.S.C. § 641, Public money, property or records, was increased from $100 to $1000 pursuant to section 606 of the Economic Espionage Act of 1996, P. L. No. 104-294, 110 Stat. 3488 (1996), a value of $500 was chosen to maintain deterrence, simplicity, and uniformity for the Manual's property offenses.”.
g. The Analysis to paragraph 49(e) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: The monetary amount affecting the maximum punishments has been revised from $100 to $500 to account for inflation. The last change was in 1969 raising the amount to $100. The value has also been readjusted to realign it more closely with the division between felony and misdemeanor penalties in civilian jurisdictions. See generally American Law Institute, Model Penal Code and Commentaries § 223.1 (1980) (suggesting $500 as the value).”.
h. The Analysis to paragraph 52(e) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: The monetary amount affecting the maximum punishments has been revised from $100 to $500 to account for inflation. The last change was in 1969 raising the amount to $100. The value has also been readjusted to realign it more closely with the division between felony and misdemeanor penalties in civilian jurisdictions. See generally American Start Printed Page 18791Law Institute, Model Penal Code and Commentaries § 223.1 (1980) (suggesting $500 as the value). A value of $500 was chosen to maintain deterrence, simplicity, and uniformity for the Manual's property offenses. 18 U.S.C. § 81, Arson within special maritime and territorial jurisdiction, no longer grades the offense on the basis of value.”.
i. The Analysis to paragraph 58(e) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: The monetary amount affecting the maximum punishments has been revised from $100 to $500 to account for inflation. The last change was in 1969 raising the amount to $100. The value has also been readjusted to realign it more closely with the division between felony and misdemeanor penalties in civilian jurisdictions. See generally American Law Institute, Model Penal Code and Commentaries § 223.1 (1980) (suggesting $500 as the value).”.
j. The Analysis to paragraph 62. Article 134 ' (Adultery) is amended to read as follows:
“c. Explanation. (1) Subparagraph c(2) is based on United States. v. Snyder, 4 C.M.R. 15 (1952); United States v. Ruiz, 46 M.J. 503 (A. F. Ct. Crim. App. 1997); United States v. Green, 39 M.J. 606 (A.C.M.R. 1994); United States v. Collier, 36 M.J. 501 (A.F.C.M.R. 1992); United States v. Perez, 33 M.J. 1050 (A.C.M.R. 1991); United States v. Linnear, 16 M.J. 628 (A.F.C.M.R. 1983); Part IV, paragraph 60c(2)(a) of MCM. Subparagraph c(3) is based on United States v. Poole, 39 M.J. 819 (A.C.M.R. 1994). Subparagraph c(4) is based on United States v. Fogarty, 35 M.J. 885 (A.C.M.R. 1992); Military Judges' Benchbook, DA PAM 27-9, paragraph 3-62-1 and 5-11-2 (30 Sep. 1996). See R.C.M. 916(j) and (l)(1) for a general discussion of mistake of fact and ignorance, which cannot be based on a negligent failure to discover the true facts.
“(2) When determining whether adulterous acts constitute the offense of adultery under Article 134, commanders should consider the listed factors. Each commander has discretion to dispose of offenses by members of the command. As with any alleged offense, however, under R.C.M. 306(b) commanders should dispose of an allegation of adultery at the lowest appropriate level. As the R.C.M. 306(b) discussion states, many factors must be taken into consideration and balanced, including, to the extent practicable, the nature of the offense, any mitigating or extenuating circumstances, the character and military service of the military member, any recommendations made by subordinate commanders, the interests of justice, military exigencies, and the effect of the decision on the military member and the command. The goal should be a disposition that is warranted, appropriate, and fair. In the case of officers, also consult the explanation to paragraph 59 in deciding how to dispose of an allegation of adultery.”.
k. The Analysis to paragraph 78(e) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: The monetary amount affecting the maximum punishments has been revised from $100 to $500 to account for inflation. The last change was in 1969 raising the amount to $100. The value has also been readjusted to realign it more closely with the division between felony and misdemeanor penalties in civilian jurisdictions. See generally American Law Institute, Model Penal Code and Commentaries § 223.1 (1980) (suggesting $500 as the value).”.
Start Printed Page 18792
l. The Analysis to paragraph 106(e) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“2002 Amendment: The monetary amount affecting the maximum punishments has been revised from $100 to $500 to account for inflation. The last change was in 1969 raising the amount to $100. The value has also been readjusted to realign it more closely with the division between felony and misdemeanor penalties in civilian jurisdictions. See generally American Law Institute, Model Penal Code and Commentaries § 223.1 (1980) (suggesting $500 as the value).”.
Executive Order 13263 of April 29, 2002
President's New Freedom Commission on Mental Health
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to improve America's mental health service delivery system for individuals with serious mental illness and children with serious emotional disturbances, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment. There is hereby established the President's New Freedom Commission on Mental Health (Commission).
Sec. 2.
Membership. (a) The Commission's membership shall be composed of:
(i) Not more than fifteen members appointed by the President, including providers, payers, administrators, and consumers of mental health services and family members of consumers; and
(ii) Not more than seven ex officio members, four of whom shall be designated by the Secretary of Health and Human Services, and the remaining three of whom shall be designated—one each—by the Secretaries of the Departments of Labor, Education, and Veterans Affairs.
(b) The President shall designate a Chair from among the fifteen members of the Commission appointed by the President.
Sec. 3.
Mission. The mission of the Commission shall be to conduct a comprehensive study of the United States mental health service delivery system, including public and private sector providers, and to advise the President on methods of improving the system. The Commission's goal shall be to recommend improvements to enable adults with serious mental illness and children with serious emotional disturbances to live, work, learn, and participate fully in their communities. In carrying out its mission, the Commission shall, at a minimum:
(a) Review the current quality and effectiveness of public and private providers and Federal, State, and local government involvement in the delivery of services to individuals with serious mental illnesses and children with serious emotional disturbances, and identify unmet needs and barriers to services.
(b) Identify innovative mental health treatments, services, and technologies that are demonstrably effective and can be widely replicated in different settings.
(c) Formulate policy options that could be implemented by public and private providers, and Federal, State, and local governments to integrate the use of effective treatments and services, improve coordination among service providers, and improve community integration for adults with serious mental illnesses and children with serious emotional disturbances.
Sec. 4.
Principles. In conducting its mission, the Commission shall adhere to the following principles:
(a) The Commission shall focus on the desired outcomes of mental health care, which are to attain each individual's maximum level of employment, self-care, interpersonal relationships, and community participation;
(b) The Commission shall focus on community-level models of care that efficiently coordinate the multiple health and human service providers and public and private payers involved in mental health treatment and delivery of services;Start Printed Page 22338
(c) The Commission shall focus on those policies that maximize the utility of existing resources by increasing cost effectiveness and reducing unnecessary and burdensome regulatory barriers;
(d) The Commission shall consider how mental health research findings can be used most effectively to influence the delivery of services; and
(e) The Commission shall follow the principles of Federalism, and ensure that its recommendations promote innovation, flexibility, and accountability at all levels of government and respect the constitutional role of the States and Indian tribes.
Sec. 5.
Administration. (a) The Department of Health and Human Services, to the extent permitted by law, shall provide funding and administrative support for the Commission.
(b) To the extent funds are available and as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in Government service (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707), members of the Commission appointed from among private citizens of the United States may be allowed travel expenses while engaged in the work of the Commission, including per diem in lieu of subsistence. All members of the Commission who are officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
(c) The Commission shall have a staff headed by an Executive Director, who shall be selected by the President. To the extent permitted by law, office space, analytical support, and additional staff support for the Commission shall be provided by executive branch departments and agencies.
(d) Insofar as the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended, may apply to the Commission, any functions of the President under that Act, except for those in section 6 of that Act, shall be performed by the Department of Health and Human Services, in accordance with the guidelines that have been issued by the Administrator of General Services.
Sec. 6.
Reports. The Commission shall submit reports to the President as follows:
(a) Interim Report. Within 6 months from the date of this order, an interim report shall describe the extent of unmet needs and barriers to care within the mental health system and provide examples of community-based care models with success in coordination of services and providing desired outcomes.
(b) Final Report. The final report will set forth the Commission's recommendations, in accordance with its mission as stated in section 3 of this order. The submission date shall be determined by the Chair in consultation with the President.
Sec. 7.
Termination. The Commission shall terminate 1 year from the date of this order, unless extended by the President prior to that date.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 39243
Executive Order 13264 of June 4, 2002
Amendment to Executive Order 13180, Air Traffic Performance-Based Organization
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered that Executive Order 13180 of December 7, 2000, is amended as follows:
Section 1. The first sentence of that order is amended by deleting “, an inherently governmental function,”.
Sect. 2.
Section 6 of that order is amended to read as follows: “This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, nor does it, create any right to administrative or judicial review, or any right, whether substantive or procedural, enforceable by any party against the United States, its agencies or instrumentalities, its officers or employees, or any other person.”
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13265 of June 6, 2002
President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to expand the executive branch's program for physical fitness and sports and establish the President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports (the “Council”), it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Purpose. The Secretary of Health and Human Services (Secretary) shall, in carrying out his responsibilities for public health and human services, develop and coordinate a national program to enhance physical activity and sports participation. Through this program, the Secretary shall seek to:
(a) expand national interest in and awareness of the benefits of regular physical activity and active sports participation;
(b) stimulate and enhance coordination of programs within and among the private and public sectors that promote participation in, and safe and easy access to, physical activity and sports;
(c) expand availability of quality information and guidance regarding physical activity and sports participation;
(d) integrate physical activity into a broader health-promotion and disease-prevention effort through Federal agencies and the private sector; and
(e) target all Americans, with particular emphasis on children and adolescents, as well as populations or communities in which specific risks or disparities in participation in, access to, or knowledge about the benefits of physical activity have been identified.
Sec. 2.
The President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports.
(a) There is hereby established the President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports.
(b) The Council shall be composed of up to 20 members appointed by the President. The President may designate one or more members to be Chair or Vice Chair. Each member shall serve for a term of 2 years and may continue to serve after the expiration of that term until a successor is appointed.
Sec. 3.
Functions of the Council.
(a) The Council shall advise the President, through the Secretary, concerning progress made in carrying out the provisions of this order and shall recommend to the President, through the Secretary, actions to accelerate progress.
(b) The Council shall advise the Secretary on ways to enhance opportunities for participation in physical fitness and sports. Recommendations may address, but are not necessarily limited to, public awareness campaigns, Federal, State, and local physical activity initiatives, and partnership opportunities between public- and private-sector health-promotion entities.
(c) The Council shall function as a liaison to relevant State, local, and private entities in order to advise the Secretary regarding opportunities to extend and improve physical activity programs and services at both the local and national levels.Start Printed Page 39842
(d) The Council shall monitor the need for the enhancement of programs and educational and promotional materials sponsored, overseen, or disseminated by the Council, and shall advise the Secretary as necessary concerning such need.
Sec. 4.
Administration.
(a) Each Federal agency shall, to the extent permitted by law and subject to available funds, furnish such information and assistance to the Secretary and the Council as they may request.
(b) The members of the Council shall serve without compensation for their work on the Council. Members of the Council may, however, receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in the Government (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707).
(c) To the extent permitted by law, the Secretary shall furnish the Council with necessary staff, supplies, facilities, and other administrative services. The expenses of the Council shall be paid from funds available to the Secretary.
(d) The Secretary shall appoint an Executive Director of the Council who shall serve as a liaison to the Secretary and the White House on matters and activities pertaining to the Council.
(e) The Council may establish subcommittees as appropriate to aid in its work. Such subcommittees shall meet on a voluntary basis and be defined by objectives established in coordination with and agreed upon by the Secretary and the President.
(f) The seal prescribed by Executive Order 10830 of July 24, 1959, as amended, shall be the seal of the President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports established by this order.
Sec. 5.
General Provisions.
(a) Insofar as the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.) (Act), may apply to the Administration of any portion of this order, any functions of the President under the Act, except that of reporting to the Congress, shall be performed by the Secretary in accordance with the guidelines and procedures issued by the Administrator of General Services.
(b) In accordance with the Act, the Council shall terminate 2 years from the date of this order, unless extended by the President.
(c) Executive Order 12345 of February 2, 1982, as amended, is revoked.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13266 of June 20, 2002
Activities To Promote Personal Fitness
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to improve the efficiency and coordination of Federal policies related to personal fitness of the general public, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. This order is issued consistent with the following findings and principles:
(a) Growing scientific evidence indicates that an increasing number of Americans are suffering from negligible physical activity, poor dietary habits, insufficient utilization of preventive health screenings, and engaging in risky behaviors such as abuse of alcohol, tobacco, and drugs.
(b) Existing information on the importance of appropriate physical activity, diet, preventive health screenings, and avoiding harmful substances is often not received by the public, or, if received, is not acted on sufficiently.
(c) Individuals of all ages, locations, and levels of personal fitness can benefit from some level of appropriate physical activity, dietary guidance, preventive health screening, and making healthy choices.
(d) While personal fitness is an individual responsibility, the Federal Government may, within the authority and funds otherwise available, expand the opportunities for individuals to empower themselves to improve their general health. Such opportunities may include improving the flow of information about personal fitness, assisting in the utilization of that information, increasing the accessibility of resources for physical activity, and reducing barriers to achieving good personal fitness.
Sec. 2.
Agency Responsibilities in Promoting Personal Fitness.
(a) The Secretaries of Agriculture, Education, Health and Human Services (HHS), Housing and Urban Development, Interior, Labor, Transportation, and Veterans Affairs, and the Director of the Office of National Drug Policy shall review and evaluate the policies, programs, and regulations of their respective departments and offices that in any way relate to the personal fitness of the general public. Based on that review, the Secretaries and the Director shall determine whether existing policies, programs, and regulations of their respective departments and offices should be modified or whether new policies or programs could be implemented. These new policies and programs shall be consistent with otherwise available authority and appropriated funds, and shall improve the Federal Government's assistance of individuals, private organizations, and State and local governments to (i) increase physical activity; (ii) promote responsible dietary habits; (iii) increase utilization of preventive health screenings; and (iv) encourage healthy choices concerning alcohol, tobacco, drugs, and safety among the general public.
(b) Each department and office included in section 2(a) shall report to the President, through the Secretary of Health and Human Services, its proposed actions within 90 days of the date of this order.
(c) There shall be a Personal Fitness Interagency Working Group (Working Group), composed of the Secretaries or Director of the departments and office included in section 2(a) (or their designees) and chaired by the Secretary of HHS or his designee. In order to improve efficiency through information sharing and to eliminate waste and overlap, the Working Group shall Start Printed Page 42468work to ensure the cooperation of Federal agencies in coordinating Federal personal fitness activities. The Working Group shall meet subject to the call of the Chair, but not less than twice a year. The Department of Health and Human Services shall provide such administrative support to the Working Group as the Secretary of HHS deems necessary. Each member of the Working Group shall be a full-time or permanent part-time officer or employee of the Federal Government.
Sec. 3.
General Provisions. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and it is not intended to, and does not, create any right, benefit, trust, or responsibility, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies or entities, its officers or employees, or any person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 42469
Executive Order 13267 of June 20, 2002
Establishing a Transition Planning Office for the Department of Homeland Security Within the Office of Management and Budget
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment. I hereby establish within the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) a Transition Planning Office for the Department of Homeland Security (the “Transition Planning Office”), to be headed by the Director of the Transition Planning Office for the Department of Homeland Security (the “Director for Transition Planning”).
Sec. 2.
Missions. The missions of the Transition Planning Office shall be to:
(a) coordinate, guide, and conduct transition and related planning throughout the executive branch of the United States Government in preparation for establishment of the proposed Department of Homeland Security; and
(b) consistent with Presidential guidance, work with the Congress as it considers legislation to establish that Department.
Sec. 3.
Administration. (a) The Director of OMB shall ensure that the Transition Planning Office receives appropriate personnel (including detailees and assignees, as appropriate), funding, and administrative support for the Office, subject to the availability of appropriations. The Director of OMB is authorized to make expenditures under section 522 of title 31, United States Code, as may be appropriate to carry out this order.
(b) If an individual who is an Assistant to the President is appointed to serve simultaneously as Director for Transition Planning, the functioning, personnel, funds, records, and property of the office of the Assistant to the President and the office of the Director for Transition Planning shall be kept separate in the same manner as if the two offices were headed by two different individuals.
Sec. 4.
Other Departments and Agencies. This order does not alter the existing authorities of United States Government departments and agencies. In carrying out the missions set forth in section 2 of this order, all executive departments and agencies are directed to assist the Director for Transition Planning and the Transition Planning Office to the extent permitted by law.Start Printed Page 42470
Sec. 5.
Termination. The Transition Planning Office, and all the authorities of this order, shall terminate within 90 days after the date on which legislation creating the Department of Homeland Security is enacted, or within 1 year of the date of this order, whichever occurs first.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13268 of July 2, 2002
Termination of Emergency With Respect to the Taliban and Amendment of Executive Order 13224 of September 23, 2001
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) (NEA), section 5 of the United Nations Participation Act of 1945, as amended (22 U.S.C. 287c), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, find that the situation that gave rise to the declaration of a national emergency in Executive Order 13129 of July 4, 1999, with respect to the Taliban, in allowing territory under its control in Afghanistan to be used as a safe haven and base of operations for Usama bin Ladin and the Al-Qaida organization, has been significantly altered given the success of the military campaign in Afghanistan, and hereby revoke that order and terminate the national emergency declared in that order with respect to the Taliban. At the same time, and in order to take additional steps with respect to the grave acts of terrorism and threats of terrorism committed by foreign terrorists, the continuing and immediate threat of further attacks on United States nationals or the United States, and the national emergency described and declared in Executive Order 13224 of September 23, 2001, I hereby order:
Section 1. The Annex to Executive Order 13224 of September 23, 2001, is amended by adding thereto the following persons in appropriate alphabetical order:
Mohammed Omar (aka, Amir al-Mumineen [Commander of the Faithful])
The Taliban.
Sec. 2. For the purposes of this order and Executive Order 13224 of September 23, 2001, the term “the Taliban” is also known as the “Taleban,” “Islamic Movement of Taliban,” “the Taliban Islamic Movement,” “Talibano Islami Tahrik,” and “Tahrike Islami'a Taliban”. The Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, is hereby authorized to modify the definition of the term “the Taliban,” as appropriate.
Sec. 3. Nothing contained in this order shall create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable by any party against the United States, its agencies or instrumentalities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
Start Printed Page 44752
Sec. 4. Pursuant to section 202 of the NEA (50 U.S.C. 1622), termination of the national emergency with respect to the Taliban shall not affect any action taken or proceeding pending not finally concluded or determined as of the date of this order, or any action or proceeding based on any act committed prior to the date of this order, or any rights or duties that matured or penalties that were incurred prior to the date of this order.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 45287
Executive Order 13269 of July 3, 2002
Expedited Naturalization of Aliens and Noncitizen Nationals Serving in an Active-Duty Status During the War on
Terrorism
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 329 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1440) (the “Act”), and solely in order to provide expedited naturalization for aliens and noncitizen nationals serving in an active-duty status in the Armed Forces of the United States during the period of the war against terrorists of global reach, it is hereby ordered as follows:
For the purpose of determining qualification for the exception from the usual requirements for naturalization, I designate as a period in which the Armed Forces of the United States were engaged in armed conflict with a hostile foreign force the period beginning on September 11, 2001. Such period will be deemed to terminate on a date designated by future Executive Order. Those persons serving honorably in active-duty status in the Armed Forces of the United States, during the period beginning on September 11, 2001, and terminating on the date to be so designated, are eligible for naturalization in accordance with the statutory exception to the naturalization requirements, as provided in section 329 of the Act. Nothing contained in this order is intended to affect, nor does it affect, any other power, right, or obligation of the United States, its agencies, officers, employees, or any other person under Federal law or the law of nations.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 45288
Executive Order 13270 of July 3, 2002
Tribal Colleges and Universities
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. There is a unique relationship between the United States and Indian tribes, and a special relationship between the United States and Alaska Native entities. It is the policy of the Federal Government that this Nation's commitment to educational excellence and opportunity must extend as well to the tribal colleges and universities (tribal colleges) that serve Indian tribes and Alaska Native entities. The President's Board of Advisors on Tribal Colleges and Universities (the “Board”) and the White House Initiative on Tribal Colleges and Universities (WHITCU) established by this order shall ensure that this national policy regarding tribal colleges is carried out with direct accountability at the highest levels of the Federal Government.
Tribal colleges are both integral and essential to their communities. Often they are the only postsecondary institutions within some of our Nation's poorest rural areas. They fulfill a vital role: in maintaining and preserving irreplaceable languages and cultural traditions; in offering a high-quality college education to younger students; and in providing job training and other career-building programs to adults and senior citizens. Tribal colleges provide crucial services in communities that continue to suffer high rates of unemployment and the resulting social and economic distress.
The Federal Government's commitment to tribal colleges is reaffirmed and the private sector can and should contribute to the colleges' educational and cultural missions.
Finally, postsecondary institutions can play a vital role in promoting excellence in early childhood, elementary, and secondary education. The Federal Government will therefore work to implement the innovations and reforms of the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 (Public Law 107-110) in partnership with tribal colleges and their American Indian and Alaska Native communities.
Sec. 2.
Definition of Tribal Colleges and Universities. Tribal colleges are those institutions cited in section 532 of the Equity in Educational Land-Grant Status Act of 1994 (7 U.S.C. 301 note), any other institution that qualifies for funding under the Tribally Controlled Community College Assistance Act of 1978 (25 U.S.C. 1801 et seq.), and Diné College, authorized in the Navajo Community College Assistance Act of 1978, Public Law 95-471, title II (25 U.S.C. 640a note).
Sec. 3.
Board of Advisors. (a) Establishment. There shall be established in the Department of Education a Presidential advisory committee entitled the President's Board of Advisors on Tribal Colleges and Universities (the “Board”).
(b) Membership. The Board shall consist of not more than 15 members who shall be appointed by the President, one of whom shall be designated by the President as Chair. The Board shall include representatives of tribal colleges and may also include representatives of the higher, early childhood, elementary, and secondary education communities; tribal officials; health, business, and financial institutions; private foundations; and such other persons as the President deems appropriate.Start Printed Page 45289
(c) Functions. The Board shall provide advice regarding the progress made by Federal agencies toward fulfilling the purposes and objectives of this order. The Board also shall provide recommendations to the President, through the Secretary of Education (Secretary), on ways the Federal Government can help tribal colleges:
(1) use long-term development, endowment building, and planning to strengthen institutional viability;
(2) improve financial management and security, obtain private-sector funding support, and expand and complement Federal education initiatives;
(3) develop institutional capacity through the use of new and emerging technologies offered by both the Federal and private sectors;
(4) enhance physical infrastructure to facilitate more efficient operation and effective recruitment and retention of students and faculty; and
(5) help implement the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 and meet other high standards of educational achievement.
(d) Meetings. The Board shall meet at least annually, at the request of the Secretary, to provide advice and consultation on tribal colleges and relevant Federal and private-sector activities, and to transmit reports and present recommendations.
Sec. 4.
White House Initiative on Tribal Colleges and Universities. There shall be established in the Department of Education, Office of the Secretary, the White House Initiative on Tribal Colleges and Universities (WHITCU). The WHITCU shall:
(a) provide the staff support for the Board;
(b) assist the Secretary in the role of liaison between the executive branch and tribal colleges; and
(c) serve the Secretary in carrying out the Secretary's responsibilities under this order.
Sec. 5.
Department and Agency Participation. Each participating executive department and agency (agency), as determined by the Secretary, shall appoint a senior official who is a full-time officer of the Federal Government and who is responsible for management or program administration. The official shall report directly to the agency head, or to the agency head's designee, on agency activity under this order and serve as liaison to the WHITCU. To the extent permitted by law and regulation, each agency shall provide appropriate information as requested by the WHITCU staff pursuant to this order.
Sec. 6.
Three-Year Federal Plan.
(a)
Content. Each agency identified by the Secretary shall develop and implement a Three-Year Plan of the agency's efforts to fulfill the purposes of this order. These Three-Year Plans shall include annual performance indicators and appropriate measurable objectives for the agency. Among other relevant issues, the plans shall address how the agency intends to increase the capacity of tribal colleges to compete effectively for any available grants, contracts, cooperative agreements, and any other Federal resources, and to encourage tribal colleges to participate in Federal programs. The plans also may emphasize access to high-quality educational opportunities for economically disadvantaged Indian students, consistent with requirements of the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001; the preservation and revitalization of tribal languages and cultural traditions; and innovative approaches to better link tribal colleges with early childhood, elementary, and secondary education programs. The agency's performance indicators and objectives should be clearly reflected in the agency's annual budget submission to the Office of Management and Budget. To facilitate the attainment of these performance indicators and objectives, the head of each agency identified by the Secretary, shall provide, as appropriate, technical assistance and information to tribal colleges regarding the program activities of the agency Start Printed Page 45290and the preparation of applications or proposals for grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements.
(b)
Submission. Each agency shall submit its Three-Year Plan to the WHITCU. In consultation with the Board, the WHITCU shall then review these Three-Year Plans and develop an integrated Three-Year Plan for Assistance to Tribal Colleges, which the Secretary shall review and submit to the President. Agencies may revise their Three-Year Plans within the three-year period.
(c) Annual Performance Reports. Each agency shall submit to the WHITCU an Annual Performance Report that measures the agency's performance against the objectives set forth in its Three-Year Plan. In consultation with the Board, the WHITCU shall review and combine Annual Performance Reports into one annual report, which shall be submitted to the Secretary for review, in consultation with the Office of Management and Budget.
Sec. 7.
Private Sector. In cooperation with the Board, the WHITCU shall encourage the private sector to assist tribal colleges through increased use of such strategies as:
(a) matching funds to support increased endowments;
(b) developing expertise and more effective ways to manage finances, improve information systems, build facilities, and improve course offerings; and
(c) increasing resources for and training of faculty.
Sec. 8.
Termination. The Board shall terminate 2 years after the date of this order unless the Board is renewed by the President prior to the end of that 2-year period.
Sec. 9.
Administration. (a)
Compensation. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation, but shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in Government service (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707).
(b) Funding. The Board and the WHITCU shall be funded by the Department of Education.
(c) Administrative Support. The Department of Education shall provide appropriate administrative services and staff support for the Board and the WHITCU. With the consent of the Department of Education, other agencies participating in the WHITCU shall provide administrative support (including detailees) to the WHITCU consistent with statutory authority. The Board and the WHITCU each shall have a staff and shall be supported at appropriate levels commensurate with that of similar White House Initiative Offices.
(d) General Provisions. Insofar as the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.) (the “Act”), may apply to the administration of any portion of this order, any functions of the President under the Act, except that of reporting to the Congress, shall be performed by the Secretary of Education in accordance with the guidelines issued by the Administrator of General Services.Start Printed Page 45291
Sec. 10.
Revocation. Executive Order 13021 of October 19, 1996, as amended, is revoked.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13271 of July 9, 2002
Establishment of the Corporate Fraud Task Force
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to strengthen the efforts of the Department of Justice and Federal, State, and local agencies to investigate and prosecute significant financial crimes, recover the proceeds of such crimes, and ensure just and effective punishment of those who perpetrate financial crimes, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment. The Attorney General shall immediately establish within the Department of Justice a Corporate Fraud Task Force (Task Force). Without regard to any other provision of this order, the Task Force shall be subject to the authority of the Attorney General under applicable law.
Sec. 2.
Membership and Operation. Subject to section 4 of this order, the Task Force shall have the following members:
(a) the Deputy Attorney General, who shall serve as Chair;
(b) the Assistant Attorney General (Criminal Division);
(c) the Assistant Attorney General (Tax Division);
(d) the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation;
(e) the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York;
(f) the United States Attorney for the Eastern District of New York;
(g) the United States Attorney for the Northern District of Illinois;
(h) the United States Attorney for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania;
(i) the United States Attorney for the Central District of California;
(j) the United States Attorney for the Northern District of California;
(k) the United States Attorney for the Southern District of Texas; and
(l) such other officers or employees of the Department of Justice as the Attorney General may from time to time designate.
The Deputy Attorney General shall convene and direct the work of the Task Force in fulfilling all its functions under this order. The Deputy Attorney General may permit, when he deems it appropriate, the designee of a member of the Task Force, including those designated under section 4 of this order, to participate in lieu of the member. The Deputy Attorney General shall convene the first meeting of the Task Force within 10 days of the date of this order and shall thereafter convene the Task Force at such times as he deems appropriate.
Sec. 3.
Functions. Consistent with the constitutional authority of the President, the authorities assigned to the Attorney General by law, and other applicable law, the Task Force shall:
(a) provide direction for the investigation and prosecution of cases of securities fraud, accounting fraud, mail and wire fraud, money laundering, tax fraud based on such predicate offenses, and other related financial crimes committed by commercial entities and directors, officers, professional advisers, and employees thereof (hereinafter “financial crimes”), when such cases are determined by the Deputy Attorney General, for purposes of this order, to be significant;
(b) provide recommendations to the Attorney General for allocation and reallocation of resources of the Department of Justice for investigation and Start Printed Page 46092prosecution of significant financial crimes, recovery of proceeds from such crimes to the extent permitted by law, and other matters determined by the Task Force from time to time to be of the highest priority in the investigation and prosecution of such crimes; and
(c) make recommendations to the President, through the Attorney General, from time to time for:
(i) action to enhance cooperation among departments, agencies, and entities of the Federal Government in the investigation and prosecution of significant financial crimes;
(ii) action to enhance cooperation among Federal, State, and local authorities responsible for the investigation and prosecution of significant financial crimes;
(iii) changes in rules, regulations, or policy to improve the effective investigation and prosecution of significant financial crimes; and
(iv) recommendations to the Congress regarding such measures as the President may judge necessary and expedient relating to significant financial crimes, or the investigation or prosecution thereof.
Sec. 4.
Additional Participation for Specified Functions. In the Task Force's performance of the functions set forth in subsection 3(c) of this order, and to the extent permitted by law, the following officers of the executive branch shall be members of the Task Force in addition to such other officers of the Federal Government as the Deputy Attorney General deems appropriate:
(a) the Secretary of the Treasury;
(b) the Chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission;
(c) the Chairman of the Commodities Futures Trading Commission;
(d) the Chairman of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission; and
(e) the Chairman of the Federal Communications Commission.
Sec. 5.
Internal Management Purpose. This order is intended to improve the internal management of the Federal Government. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity or otherwise against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, instrumentalities, officers, or employees, or any other person.
Sec. 6.
Termination. The Task Force shall terminate when directed by the President or, with the approval of the President, by the Attorney General.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13272 of August 13, 2002
Proper Consideration of Small Entities in Agency Rulemaking
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
General Requirements. Each agency shall establish procedures and policies to promote compliance with the Regulatory Flexibility Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. 601 et seq.) (the “Act”). Agencies shall thoroughly review draft rules to assess and take appropriate account of the potential impact on small businesses, small governmental jurisdictions, and small organizations, as provided by the Act. The Chief Counsel for Advocacy of the Small Business Administration (Advocacy) shall remain available to advise agencies in performing that review consistent with the provisions of the Act.
Sec. 2.
Responsibilities of Advocacy. Consistent with the requirements of the Act, other applicable law, and Executive Order 12866 of September 30, 1993, as amended, Advocacy:
(a) shall notify agency heads from time to time of the requirements of the Act, including by issuing notifications with respect to the basic requirements of the Act within 90 days of the date of this order;
(b) shall provide training to agencies on compliance with the Act; and
(c) may provide comment on draft rules to the agency that has proposed or intends to propose the rules and to the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs of the Office of Management and Budget (OIRA).
Sec. 3.
Responsibilities of Federal Agencies. Consistent with the requirements of the Act and applicable law, agencies shall:
(a) Within 180 days of the date of this order, issue written procedures and policies, consistent with the Act, to ensure that the potential impacts of agencies' draft rules on small businesses, small governmental jurisdictions, and small organizations are properly considered during the rulemaking process. Agency heads shall submit, no later than 90 days from the date of this order, their written procedures and policies to Advocacy for comment. Prior to issuing final procedures and policies, agencies shall consider any such comments received within 60 days from the date of the submission of the agencies' procedures and policies to Advocacy. Except to the extent otherwise specifically provided by statute or Executive Order, agencies shall make the final procedures and policies available to the public through the Internet or other easily accessible means;
(b) Notify Advocacy of any draft rules that may have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities under the Act. Such notifications shall be made (i) when the agency submits a draft rule to OIRA under Executive Order 12866 if that order requires such submission, or (ii) if no submission to OIRA is so required, at a reasonable time prior to publication of the rule by the agency; and
(c) Give every appropriate consideration to any comments provided by Advocacy regarding a draft rule. Consistent with applicable law and appropriate protection of executive deliberations and legal privileges, an agency shall include, in any explanation or discussion accompanying publication in the Federal Register of a final rule, the agency's response to any written comments submitted by Advocacy on the proposed rule that preceded the Start Printed Page 53462final rule; provided, however, that such inclusion is not required if the head of the agency certifies that the public interest is not served thereby.
Agencies and Advocacy may, to the extent permitted by law, engage in an exchange of data and research, as appropriate, to foster the purposes of the Act.
Sec. 4.
Definitions. Terms defined in section 601 of title 5, United States Code, including the term “agency,” shall have the same meaning in this order.
Sec. 5.
Preservation of Authority. Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or affect the authority of the Administrator of the Small Business Administration to supervise the Small Business Administration as provided in the first sentence of section 2(b)(1) of Public Law 85-09536 (15 U.S.C. 633(b)(1)).
Sec. 6.
Reporting. For the purpose of promoting compliance with this order, Advocacy shall submit a report not less than annually to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget on the extent of compliance with this order by agencies.
Sec. 7.
Confidentiality. Consistent with existing law, Advocacy may publicly disclose information that it receives from the agencies in the course of carrying out this order only to the extent that such information already has been lawfully and publicly disclosed by OIRA or the relevant rulemaking agency.
Sec. 8.
Judicial Review. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity, against the United States, its departments, agencies, or other entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13273 of August 21, 2002
Further Amending Executive Order 10173, as Amended, Prescribing Regulations Relating to the Safeguarding of Vessels, Harbors, Ports, and Waterfront Facilities of the United States
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 1 of title II of the Act of June 15, 1917, as amended (50 U.S.C. 191) (the “Act”), and in addition to the finding in Executive Order 10173 of October 18, 1950, and any other declaration or finding in force under section 1 of the Act, I find that the security of the United States is endangered by reason of disturbances in the international relations of the United States that have existed since the terrorist attacks on the United States of September 11, 2001, and that such disturbances continue to endanger such relations, and hereby order that:
Part 6 of Title 33 of the Code of Federal Regulations is amended by:
(a) Adding after section 6.01-5 the following new section:
“6.01-6 Area Commander. “Area Commander,” as used in this part, means the officer of the Coast Guard designated by the Commandant to command a Coast Guard Area.”; and
(b) Amending section 6.04-1 to read as follows:
“6.04-1 Enforcement. (a) The rules and regulations in this part shall be enforced by the Captain of the Port under the supervision and general direction of the District Commander, Area Commander, and the Commandant. All authority and power vested in the Captain of the Port by the regulations in this part shall be deemed vested in and may be exercised by the District Commander, Area Commander, and the Commandant.
(b) The rules and regulations in this part may be enforced by any other officer or petty officer of the Coast Guard designated by the District Commander, Area Commander, or the Commandant.
(c) Any authority or power under this part vested in, delegated to, or exercised by a member of the Coast Guard shall be subject to the direction of the Secretary of the Department in which the Coast Guard is operating.”.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13274 of September 18, 2002
Environmental Stewardship and Transportation Infrastructure Project Reviews
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to enhance environmental stewardship and streamline the environmental review and development of transportation infrastructure projects, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. The development and implementation of transportation infrastructure projects in an efficient and environmentally sound manner is essential to the well-being of the American people and a strong American economy. Executive departments and agencies (agencies) shall take appropriate actions, to the extent consistent with applicable law and available resources, to promote environmental stewardship in the Nation's transportation system and expedite environmental reviews of high-priority transportation infrastructure projects.
Sec. 2.
Actions. (a) For transportation infrastructure projects, agencies shall, in support of the Department of Transportation, formulate and implement administrative, policy, and procedural mechanisms that enable each agency required by law to conduct environmental reviews (reviews) with respect to such projects to ensure completion of such reviews in a timely and environmentally responsible manner.
(b) In furtherance of the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the Secretary of Transportation, in coordination with agencies as appropriate, shall advance environmental stewardship through cooperative actions with project sponsors to promote protection and enhancement of the natural and human environment in the planning, development, operation, and maintenance of transportation facilities and services.
(c) The Secretary of Transportation shall designate for the purposes of this order a list of high-priority transportation infrastructure projects that should receive expedited agency reviews and shall amend such list from time to time as the Secretary deems appropriate. For projects on the Secretary's list, agencies shall to the maximum extent practicable expedite their reviews for relevant permits or other approvals, and take related actions as necessary, consistent with available resources and applicable laws, including those relating to safety, public health, and environmental protection.
Sec. 3.
Interagency Task Force. (a)
Establishment. There is established, within the Department of Transportation for administrative purposes, the interagency ``Transportation Infrastructure Streamlining Task Force'' (Task Force) to: (i) monitor and assist agencies in their efforts to expedite a review of transportation infrastructure projects and issue permits or similar actions, as necessary; (ii) review projects, at least quarterly, on the list of priority projects pursuant to section 2(c) of this order; and (iii) identify and promote policies that can effectively streamline the process required to provide approvals for transportation infrastructure projects, in compliance with applicable law, while maintaining safety, public health, and environmental protection.
(b)
Membership and Operation. The Task Force shall promote interagency cooperation and the establishment of appropriate mechanisms to coordinate Federal, State, tribal, and local agency consultation, review, approval, and permitting of transportation infrastructure projects. The Task Force shall consist exclusively of the following officers of the United States: the Secretary Start Printed Page 59450of Agriculture, Secretary of Commerce, Secretary of Transportation (who shall chair the Task Force), Secretary of the Interior, Secretary of Defense, Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, Chairman of the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, and Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality. A member of the Task Force may designate, to perform the Task Force functions of the member, any person who is part of the member's department, agency, or office and who is either an officer of the United States appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate or a member of the Senior Executive Service. The Task Force shall report to the President through the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality.
Sec. 4.
Report. At least once each year, the Task Force shall submit to the President a report that: (a) Describes the results of the coordinated and expedited reviews on a project-by-project basis, and identifies those procedures and actions that proved to be most useful and appropriate in coordinating and expediting the review of the projects.
(b) Identifies substantive and procedural requirements of Federal, State, tribal, and local laws, regulations, and Executive Orders that are inconsistent with, duplicative of, or are structured so as to restrict their efficient implementation with other applicable requirements.
(c) Makes recommendations regarding those additional actions that could be taken to: (i) address the coordination and expediting of reviews of transportation infrastructure projects by simplifying and harmonizing applicable substantive and procedural requirements; and (ii) elevate and resolve controversies among Federal, State, tribal, and local agencies related to the review or impacts of transportation infrastructure projects in a timely manner.
(d) Provides any other recommendations that would, in the judgement of the Task Force, advance the policy set forth in section 1 of this order.
Sec. 5.
Preservation of Authority. Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, and legislative proposals.
Sec. 6.
Judicial Review. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 62869
Executive Order 13275 of October 7, 2002
Creating a Board of Inquiry To Report on Certain Labor Disputes Affecting the Maritime Industry of the United States
WHEREAS, there exists a labor dispute between, on the one hand, employees represented by the International Longshore and Warehouse Union and, on the other hand, employers and the bargaining association of employers who are (1) U.S. and foreign steamship companies operating ships or employed as agents for ships engaged in service to or from the Pacific Coast ports in California, Oregon, and Washington, and (2) stevedore and terminal companies operating at ports in California, Oregon, and Washington; and
WHEREAS, such dispute has resulted in a lock-out that affects a substantial part of the maritime industry, an industry engaged in trade, commerce, transportation (including the transportation of military supplies), transmission, and communication among the several States and with foreign nations; and
WHEREAS, a continuation of this lock-out, if permitted to continue, will imperil the national health and safety;
NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the authority vested in me by section 206 of the Labor Management Relations Act, 1947 (61 Stat. 155; 29 U.S.C. 176) (the “Act”), I hereby create a Board of Inquiry consisting of such members as I shall appoint to inquire into the issues involved in such dispute.
The Board shall have powers and duties as set forth in title II of the Act. The Board shall report to me in accordance with the provisions of section 206 of the Act no later than October 8, 2002.
Upon the submission of its report, the Board shall continue in existence in order to perform any additional functions under the Act, including those functions set forth in section 209(b), but shall terminate no later than upon completion of such functions.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13276 of November 15, 2002
Delegation of Responsibilities Concerning Undocumented Aliens Interdicted or Intercepted in the Caribbean Region
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including sections 212(f) and 215(a)(1) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as amended (8 U.S.C. 1182(f) and 1185(a)(1)), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and in order to delegate appropriate responsibilities to Federal agencies for responding to migration of undocumented aliens in the Caribbean region, it is hereby ordered:
Section 1.
Duties and Authorities of Agency Heads. Consistent with applicable law,
(a)(i) The Attorney General may maintain custody, at any location he deems appropriate, of any undocumented aliens he has reason to believe are seeking to enter the United States and who are interdicted or intercepted in the Caribbean region. In this regard, the Attorney General shall provide and operate a facility, or facilities, to house and provide for the needs of any such aliens. Such a facility may be located at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base or any other appropriate location.
(ii) The Attorney General may conduct any screening of such aliens that he deems appropriate, including screening to determine whether such aliens should be returned to their country of origin or transit, or whether they are persons in need of protection who should not be returned without their consent. If the Attorney General institutes such screening, then until a determination is made, the Attorney General shall provide for the custody, care, safety, transportation, and other needs of the aliens. The Attorney General shall continue to provide for the custody, care, safety, transportation, and other needs of aliens who are determined not to be persons in need of protection until such time as they are returned to their country of origin or transit.
(b) The Secretary of State shall provide for the custody, care, safety, transportation, and other needs of undocumented aliens interdicted or intercepted in the Caribbean region whom the Attorney General has identified as persons in need of protection. The Secretary of State shall provide for and execute a process for resettling such persons in need of protection, as appropriate, in countries other than their country of origin, and shall also undertake such diplomatic efforts as may be necessary to address the problem of illegal migration of aliens in the Caribbean region and to facilitate the return of those aliens who are determined not to be persons in need of protection.
(c)(i) The Secretary of Defense shall make available to the Attorney General and the Secretary of State, for the housing and care of any undocumented aliens interdicted or intercepted in the Caribbean region and taken into their custody, any facilities at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base that are excess to current military needs and the provision of which does not interfere with the operation and security of the base. The Secretary of Defense shall be responsible for providing access to such facilities and perimeter security. The Attorney General and the Secretary of State, respectively, shall be responsible for reimbursement for necessary supporting utilities.
(ii) In the event of a mass migration in the Caribbean region, the Secretary of Defense shall provide support to the Attorney General and the Secretary Start Printed Page 69986of State in carrying out the duties described in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section regarding the custody, care, safety, transportation, and other needs of the aliens, and shall assume primary responsibility for these duties on a nonreimbursable basis as necessary to contain the threat to national security posed by the migration. The Secretary of Defense shall also provide support to the Coast Guard in carrying out the duties described in Executive Order 12807 of May 24, 1992, regarding interdiction of migrants.
Sec. 2.
Definitions. For purposes of this order, the term “mass migration” means a migration of undocumented aliens that is of such magnitude and duration that it poses a threat to the national security of the United States, as determined by the President.
Sec. 3.
Scope.
(a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the authorities and responsibilities set forth in Executive Order 12807 of May 24, 1992.
(b) Nothing in this order shall be construed to make reviewable in any judicial or administrative proceeding, or otherwise, any action, omission, or matter that otherwise would not be reviewable.
(c) This order is intended only to improve the management of the executive branch. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity or otherwise against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, instrumentalities, officers, employees, or any other person.
(d) Any agency assigned any duties by this order may use the provisions of the Economy Act, 31 U.S.C. 1535 and 1536, to carry out such duties, to the extent permitted by such Act.
(e) This order shall not be construed to require any procedure to determine whether a person is a refugee or otherwise in need of protection.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13277 of November 19, 2002
Delegation of Certain Authorities and Assignment of Certain Functions Under the Trade Act of 2002
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, including the Trade Act of 2002 (the “Act”) (Public Law 107-210) and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Trade Promotion. (a) Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the authorities granted to and functions specifically assigned to the President under Division B of the Act are delegated and assigned, respectively, to the United States Trade Representative (U.S. Trade Representative).
(b) The exercise of the following authorities of, and functions specifically assigned to the President, under Division B of the Act are reserved to the President:
(1) Section 2102(c)(1), (c)(6), (c)(10) and (e) of the Act;
(2) Section 2103(a)(1), (a)(4), (a)(6), b(1), (c)(1)(B)(i), and (c)(2) of the Act;
(3) Section 2105(a)(1) of the Act; and
(4) Section 2108(b) of the Act.
(c) (i) The Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secretary of Labor and the U.S. Trade Representative, shall carry out the functions of section 2102(c)(2) of the Act with respect to establishing consultative mechanisms. The U.S. Trade Representative, in consultation with the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Labor, shall carry out the reporting function under section 2102(c)(2).
(ii) The Secretary of State, in consultation with the U.S. Trade Representative, shall carry out the functions under section 2102(c)(3) of the Act with respect to establishing consultative mechanisms, with the advice and assistance of the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Secretary of Commerce and, as the Secretary of State determines appropriate, the heads of such other departments and agencies. The U.S. Trade Representative, in consultation with the Secretary of State, shall carry out the reporting function under section 2103(c)(3).
(iii) The U.S. Trade Representative shall carry out the functions under section 2102(c)(5) of the Act. The U.S. Trade Representative shall, in consultation with the Secretary of Labor, carry out the reporting function and the function of making a report available under section 2102(c)(5).
(iv) The Secretary of Labor shall carry out section 2102(c)(7) of the Act, in consultation with the Secretary of State.
(v) The Secretary of Labor, in consultation with the Secretary of State and the U.S. Trade Representative, shall carry out the functions under section 2102(c)(8) and (c)(9).
(vi) The Secretary of the Treasury shall carry out section 2102(c)(12) of the Act, including any appropriate consultations with the Congress relating thereto.
Sec. 2.
Andean Trade. (a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the authorities granted and the functions specifically assigned to Start Printed Page 70306the President under Division C of the Act are delegated and assigned respectively, to the U.S. Trade Representative, in consultation with the Secretaries of State, Commerce, the Treasury, and Labor.
(b) The exercise of the following authorities of, and functions specifically assigned to, the President under Division C of the Act are reserved to the President:
(i) The authority to proclaim under sections 204(b)(1) and 204(b)(3)(B)(ii), and the authority to designate beneficiary countries under section 204(b)(6)(B), of the Andean Trade Preference Act as amended by section 3103(a)(2) of the Act; and
(ii) The authority to make determinations under section 203(e)(1)(B) of the Andean Trade Preference Act as amended by section 3103(b) of the Act.
(c) The head of the executive department of which the United States Customs Service is a part shall take such actions to carry out determinations and actions pursuant to the Andean Trade Preference Act, as amended, as directed pursuant to the authority delegated to the U.S. Trade Representative under this order.
Sec. 3.
Guidance for Exercising Authority and Performing Duties. (a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(b) In exercising authority delegated by, or performing functions assigned in, this order, and in performing duties related to the trade agreements program as defined in Executive Order 11846, officers of the United States:
(i) Shall ensure that all actions taken by them are consistent with the President's constitutional authority to (A) conduct the foreign affairs of the United States, including the commencement, conduct, and termination of negotiations with foreign countries and international organizations, (B) withhold information the disclosure of which could impair the foreign relations, the national security, the deliberative processes of the Executive, or the performance of the Executive's constitutional duties, (C) recommend for congressional consideration such measures as the President may judge necessary or expedient, and (D) supervise the unitary executive branch;
(ii) May redelegate authority delegated by this order and may further assign functions assigned by this order to officers of any other department or agency within the executive branch to the extent permitted by law and such redelegation or further assignment shall be published in the Federal Register; and
(iii) Shall consult the Attorney General as appropriate in implementing this subsection.
Sec. 4.
Amendment to Executive Order 11846. Section 1 of Executive Order 11846 of March 27, 1975, as amended, is further amended by inserting “, Divisions B and C of the Trade Act of 2002,” after “Trade Expansion Act of 1962, as amended”.
Start Printed Page 70307
Sec. 5.
Judicial Review. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13278 of December 11, 2002
President's Commission on the United States Postal Service
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to ensure the efficient operation of the United States Postal Service while minimizing the financial exposure of the American taxpayers, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment. There is established the President's Commission on the United States Postal Service (Commission).
Sec. 2.
Membership. Commission shall be composed of nine members appointed by the President. The President shall designate two members of the Commission to serve as Co-Chairs.
Sec. 3.
Mission. (a) The mission of the Commission shall be to examine the state of the United States Postal Service, and to prepare and submit to the President a report articulating a proposed vision for the future of the United States Postal Service and recommending the legislative and administrative reforms needed to ensure the viability of postal services.
(b) In fulfilling its mission, the Commission shall consider the following issues and such other issues relating to the Postal Service as the Commission determines appropriate:
(i) the role of the Postal Service in the 21st century and beyond;
(ii) the flexibility that the Postal Service should have to change prices, control costs, and adjust service in response to financial, competitive, or market pressures;
(iii) the rigidities in cost or service that limit the efficiency of the postal system;
(iv) the ability of the Postal Service, over the long term, to maintain universal mail delivery at affordable rates and cover its unfunded liabilities with minimum exposure to the American taxpayers;
(v) the extent to which postal monopoly restrictions continue to advance the public interest under evolving market conditions, and the extent to which the Postal Service competes with private sector services; and
(vi) the most appropriate governance and oversight structure for the Postal Service.
Sec. 4.
Administration. (a) The Department of the Treasury or any organizational entity subject to the direction of the Secretary of the Treasury shall, to the extent permitted by law, provide administrative support and funding for the Commission. The Commission is established within the Department of the Treasury for administrative purposes only.
(b) Members of the Commission shall serve without any compensation for their work on the Commission. Members appointed from among private citizens of the United States, however, while engaged in the work of the Commission, may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in Government service (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707), to the extent funds are available.
(c) The Commission shall have a staff headed by an Executive Director.
(d) The Commission, with the concurrence of the Secretary of the Treasury, may establish subcommittees, consisting of Commission members, as appropriate, to aid in its work.Start Printed Page 76672
(e) Consistent with such guidance as the President or, on the President's behalf, the Secretary of the Treasury, may provide, the Commission shall exchange information with and obtain advice from Members of Congress; Federal, State, local, and tribal officials; commercial, nonprofit, and residential users of the United States Postal Service; and others, as appropriate, including through public hearings.
(f) Insofar as the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended, may apply to the Commission, any functions of the President under that Act, except for those in section 6 of that Act, shall be performed by the Secretary of the Treasury, in accordance with the guidelines that have been issued by the Administrator of General Services.
(g) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
Sec. 5.
Report. The Commission shall submit its report, consistent with its mission set forth in section 3 of this order, to the President, through the Secretary of the Treasury, not later than July 31, 2003.
Sec. 6.
General Provisions. (a) This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and it is not intended to, and does not create, any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
(b) The Commission shall terminate 30 days after submitting its report and in no event later than August 30, 2003.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13279 of December 12, 2002
Equal Protection of the Laws for Faith-Based and Community Organizations
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 121(a) of title 40, United States Code, and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and in order to guide Federal agencies in formulating and developing policies with implications for faith-based organizations and other community organizations, to ensure equal protection of the laws for faith-based and community organizations, to further the national effort to expand opportunities for, and strengthen the capacity of, faith-based and other community organizations so that they may better meet social needs in America's communities, and to ensure the economical and efficient administration and completion of Government contracts, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Definitions. For purposes of this order:
(a) “Federal financial assistance” means assistance that non-Federal entities receive or administer in the form of grants, contracts, loans, loan guarantees, property, cooperative agreements, food commodities, direct appropriations, or other assistance, but does not include a tax credit, deduction, or exemption.
(b) “Social service program” means a program that is administered by the Federal Government, or by a State or local government using Federal financial assistance, and that provides services directed at reducing poverty, improving opportunities for low-income children, revitalizing low-income communities, empowering low-income families and low-income individuals to become self-sufficient, or otherwise helping people in need. Such programs include, but are not limited to, the following:
(i) child care services, protective services for children and adults, services for children and adults in foster care, adoption services, services related to the management and maintenance of the home, day care services for adults, and services to meet the special needs of children, older individuals, and individuals with disabilities (including physical, mental, or emotional disabilities);
(ii) transportation services;
(iii) job training and related services, and employment services;
(iv) information, referral, and counseling services;
(v) the preparation and delivery of meals and services related to soup kitchens or food banks;
(vi) health support services;
(vii) literacy and mentoring programs;
(viii) services for the prevention and treatment of juvenile delinquency and substance abuse, services for the prevention of crime and the provision of assistance to the victims and the families of criminal offenders, and services related to intervention in, and prevention of, domestic violence; and
(ix) services related to the provision of assistance for housing under Federal law.
(c) “Policies that have implications for faith-based and community organizations” refers to all policies, programs, and regulations, including official Start Printed Page 77142guidance and internal agency procedures, that have significant effects on faith-based organizations participating in or seeking to participate in social service programs supported with Federal financial assistance.
(d) “Agency” means a department or agency in the executive branch.
(e) “Specified agency heads” mean the Attorney General, the Secretaries of Agriculture, Education, Health and Human Services, Housing and Urban Development, and Labor, and the Administrator of the Agency for International Development.
Sec. 2.
Fundamental Principles and Policymaking Criteria.
In formulating and implementing policies that have implications for faith-based and community organizations, agencies that administer social service programs supported with Federal financial assistance shall, to the extent permitted by law, be guided by the following fundamental principles:
(a) Federal financial assistance for social service programs should be distributed in the most effective and efficient manner possible;
(b) The Nation's social service capacity will benefit if all eligible organizations, including faith-based and other community organizations, are able to compete on an equal footing for Federal financial assistance used to support social service programs;
(c) No organization should be discriminated against on the basis of religion or religious belief in the administration or distribution of Federal financial assistance under social service programs;
(d) All organizations that receive Federal financial assistance under social services programs should be prohibited from discriminating against beneficiaries or potential beneficiaries of the social services programs on the basis of religion or religious belief. Accordingly, organizations, in providing services supported in whole or in part with Federal financial assistance, and in their outreach activities related to such services, should not be allowed to discriminate against current or prospective program beneficiaries on the basis of religion, a religious belief, a refusal to hold a religious belief, or a refusal to actively participate in a religious practice;
(e) The Federal Government must implement Federal programs in accordance with the Establishment Clause and the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment to the Constitution. Therefore, organizations that engage in inherently religious activities, such as worship, religious instruction, and proselytization, must offer those services separately in time or location from any programs or services supported with direct Federal financial assistance, and participation in any such inherently religious activities must be voluntary for the beneficiaries of the social service program supported with such Federal financial assistance; and
(f) Consistent with the Free Exercise Clause and the Free Speech Clause of the Constitution, faith-based organizations should be eligible to compete for Federal financial assistance used to support social service programs and to participate fully in the social service programs supported with Federal financial assistance without impairing their independence, autonomy, expression, or religious character. Accordingly, a faith-based organization that applies for or participates in a social service program supported with Federal financial assistance may retain its independence and may continue to carry out its mission, including the definition, development, practice, and expression of its religious beliefs, provided that it does not use direct Federal financial assistance to support any inherently religious activities, such as worship, religious instruction, or proselytization. Among other things, faith-based organizations that receive Federal financial assistance may use their facilities to provide social services supported with Federal financial assistance, without removing or altering religious art, icons, scriptures, or other symbols from these facilities. In addition, a faith-based organization that applies for or participates in a social service program supported with Federal financial assistance may retain religious terms in its organization's name, Start Printed Page 77143select its board members on a religious basis, and include religious references in its organization's mission statements and other chartering or governing documents.
Sec. 3.
Agency Implementation.
(a) Specified agency heads shall, in coordination with the White House Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives (White House OFBCI), review and evaluate existing policies that have implications for faith-based and community organizations in order to assess the consistency of such policies with the fundamental principles and policymaking criteria articulated in section 2 of this order.
(b) Specified agency heads shall ensure that all policies that have implications for faith-based and community organizations are consistent with the fundamental principles and policymaking criteria articulated in section 2 of this order. Therefore, specified agency heads shall, to the extent permitted by law:
(i) amend all such existing policies of their respective agencies to ensure that they are consistent with the fundamental principles and policymaking criteria articulated in section 2 of this order;
(ii) where appropriate, implement new policies for their respective agencies that are consistent with and necessary to further the fundamental principles and policymaking criteria set forth in section 2 of this order; and
(iii) implement new policies that are necessary to ensure that their respective agencies collect data regarding the participation of faith-based and community organizations in social service programs that receive Federal financial assistance.
(c) Within 90 days after the date of this order, each specified agency head shall report to the President, through the Director of the White House OFBCI, the actions it proposes to undertake to accomplish the activities set forth in sections 3(a) and (b) of this order.
Sec. 4.
Amendment of Executive Order 11246.
Pursuant to section 121(a) of title 40, United States Code, and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and in order to further the strong Federal interest in ensuring that the cost and progress of Federal procurement contracts are not adversely affected by an artificial restriction of the labor pool caused by the unwarranted exclusion of faith-based organizations from such contracts, section 204 of Executive Order 11246 of September 24, 1965, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:
“SEC. 204 (a) The Secretary of Labor may, when the Secretary deems that special circumstances in the national interest so require, exempt a contracting agency from the requirement of including any or all of the provisions of Section 202 of this Order in any specific contract, subcontract, or purchase order.
(b) The Secretary of Labor may, by rule or regulation, exempt certain classes of contracts, subcontracts, or purchase orders (1) whenever work is to be or has been performed outside the United States and no recruitment of workers within the limits of the United States is involved; (2) for standard commercial supplies or raw materials; (3) involving less than specified amounts of money or specified numbers of workers; or (4) to the extent that they involve subcontracts below a specified tier.
(c) Section 202 of this Order shall not apply to a Government contractor or subcontractor that is a religious corporation, association, educational institution, or society, with respect to the employment of individuals of a particular religion to perform work connected with the carrying on by such corporation, association, educational institution, or society of its activities. Such contractors and subcontractors are not exempted or excused from complying with the other requirements contained in this Order.
(d) The Secretary of Labor may also provide, by rule, regulation, or order, for the exemption of facilities of a contractor that are in all respects separate Start Printed Page 77144and distinct from activities of the contractor related to the performance of the contract: provided, that such an exemption will not interfere with or impede the effectuation of the purposes of this Order: and provided further, that in the absence of such an exemption all facilities shall be covered by the provisions of this Order.”
Sec. 5.
General Provisions.
(a) This order supplements but does not supersede the requirements contained in Executive Orders 13198 and 13199 of January 29, 2001.
(b) The agencies shall coordinate with the White House OFBCI concerning the implementation of this order.
(c) Nothing in this order shall be construed to require an agency to take any action that would impair the conduct of foreign affairs or the national security.
Sec. 6.
Responsibilities of Executive Departments and Agencies. All executive departments and agencies (agencies) shall:
(a) designate an agency employee to serve as the liaison and point of contact with the White House OFBCI; and
(b) cooperate with the White House OFBCI and provide such information, support, and assistance to the White House OFBCI as it may request, to the extent permitted by law.
Sec. 7.
Judicial Review.
This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch, and it is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its agencies, or entities, its officers, employees or agents, or any person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 77145
Executive Order 13280 of December 12, 2002
Responsibilities of the Department of Agriculture and the Agency for International Development With Respect to Faith-Based and Community Initiatives
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to help the Federal Government coordinate a national effort to expand opportunities for faith-based and other community organizations and to strengthen their capacity to better meet social needs in America's communities, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment of Centers for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives at the Department of Agriculture and the Agency for International Development. (a) The Secretary of Agriculture and the Administrator of the Agency for International Development shall each establish within their respective agencies a Center for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives (Center).
(b) Each of these Centers shall be supervised by a Director, appointed by the agency head in consultation with the White House Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives (White House OFBCI).
(c) Each agency shall provide its Center with appropriate staff, administrative support, and other resources to meet its responsibilities under this order.
(d) Each Center shall begin operations no later than 45 days from the date of this order.
Sec. 2.
Purpose of Executive Branch Centers for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives. The purpose of the agency Centers will be to coordinate agency efforts to eliminate regulatory, contracting, and other programmatic obstacles to the participation of faith-based and other community organizations in the provision of social services.
Sec. 3.
Responsibilities of the Centers for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives. Each Center shall, to the extent permitted by law:
(a) conduct, in coordination with the White House OFBCI, an agency-wide audit to identify all existing barriers to the participation of faith-based and other community organizations in the delivery of social services by the agency, including but not limited to regulations, rules, orders, procurement, and other internal policies and practices, and outreach activities that either facially discriminate against or otherwise discourage or disadvantage the participation of faith-based and other community organizations in Federal programs;
(b) coordinate a comprehensive agency effort to incorporate faith-based and other community organizations in agency programs and initiatives to the greatest extent possible;
(c) propose initiatives to remove barriers identified pursuant to section 3(a) of this order, including but not limited to reform of regulations, procurement, and other internal policies and practices, and outreach activities;
(d) propose the development of innovative pilot and demonstration programs to increase the participation of faith- based and other community organizations in Federal as well as State and local initiatives; andStart Printed Page 77146
(e) develop and coordinate agency outreach efforts to disseminate information more effectively to faith-based and other community organizations with respect to programming changes, contracting opportunities, and other agency initiatives, including but not limited to Web and Internet resources.
Sec. 4.
Reporting Requirements.
(a) Report. Not later than 180 days from the date of this order and annually thereafter, each of the two Centers described in section 1 of this order shall prepare and submit a report to the White House OFBCI.
(b) Contents. The report shall include a description of the agency's efforts in carrying out its responsibilities under this order, including but not limited to:
(i) a comprehensive analysis of the barriers to the full participation of faith-based and other community organizations in the delivery of social services identified pursuant to section 3(a) of this order and the proposed strategies to eliminate those barriers; and
(ii) a summary of the technical assistance and other information that will be available to faith-based and other community organizations regarding the program activities of the agency and the preparation of applications or proposals for grants, cooperative agreements, contracts, and procurement.
(c) Performance Indicators. The first report, filed 180 days after the date of this order, shall include annual performance indicators and measurable objectives for agency action. Each report filed thereafter shall measure the agency's performance against the objectives set forth in the initial report.
Sec. 5.
Responsibilities of the Secretary of Agriculture and the Administrator of the Agency for International Development. The Secretary and the Administrator shall:
(a) designate an employee within their respective agencies to serve as the liaison and point of contact with the White House OFBCI; and
(b) cooperate with the White House OFBCI and provide such information, support, and assistance to the White House OFBCI as it may request, to the extent permitted by law.
Sec. 6.
Administration and Judicial Review. (a) The agency actions directed by this executive order shall be carried out subject to the availability of appropriations and to the extent permitted by law.
(b) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity by a party against the United States, its agencies, or entities, its officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13281 of December 19, 2002
Half-Day Closing of Executive Departments and Agencies of the Federal Government on Tuesday, December 24, 2002
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. All executive branch departments and agencies of the Federal Government shall be closed and their employees excused from duty for the last half of the scheduled workday on Tuesday, December 24, 2002, the day before Christmas Day, except as provided in section 2 below.
Sec. 2. The heads of executive branch departments and agencies may determine that certain offices and installations of their organizations, or parts thereof, must remain open and that certain employees must report for duty for the full scheduled workday on December 24, 2002, for reasons of national security or defense or other public reasons.
Sec. 3. Tuesday, December 24, 2002, shall be considered as falling within the scope of Executive Order 11582 of February 11, 1971, and of 5 U.S.C. 5546 and 6103(b) and other similar statutes insofar as they relate to the pay and leave of employees of the United States.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13282 of December 31, 2002
Adjustments of Certain Rates of Pay
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the laws cited herein, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Statutory Pay Systems. The rates of basic pay or salaries of the statutory pay systems (as defined in 5 U.S.C. 5302(1)), as adjusted under 5 U.S.C. 5303(a), are set forth on the schedules attached hereto and made a part hereof:
(a) The General Schedule (5 U.S.C. 5332(a)) at Schedule 1;
(b) The Foreign Service Schedule (22 U.S.C. 3963) at Schedule 2; and
(c) The schedules for the Veterans Health Administration of the Department of Veterans Affairs (38 U.S.C. 7306, 7404; section 301(a) of Public Law 102-40) at Schedule 3.
Sec. 2.
Senior Executive Service. The rates of basic pay for senior executives in the Senior Executive Service, as adjusted under 5 U.S.C. 5382, are set forth on Schedule 4 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 3.
Executive Salaries. The rates of basic pay or salaries for the following offices and positions are set forth on the schedules attached hereto and made a part hereof:
(a) The Executive Schedule (5 U.S.C. 5311-5318) at Schedule 5;
(b) The Vice President (3 U.S.C. 104) and the Congress (2 U.S.C. 31) at Schedule 6; and
(c) Justices and judges (28 U.S.C. 5, 44(d), 135, 252, and 461(a), and section 140 of Public Law 97-92) at Schedule 7.
Sec. 4.
Uniformed Services. Pursuant to section 601(a)-(b) of Public Law 107-314, the rates of monthly basic pay (37 U.S.C. 203(a)) for members of the uniformed services and the rate of monthly cadet or midshipman pay (37 U.S.C. 203(c)) are set forth on Schedule 8 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 5.
Locality-Based Comparability Payments.
(a) Pursuant to sections 5304 and 5304a of title 5, United States Code, locality-based comparability payments shall be paid in accordance with Schedule 9 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
(b) The Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall take such actions as may be necessary to implement these payments and to publish appropriate notice of such payments in the Federal Register.
Sec. 6.
Administrative Law Judges. The rates of basic pay for administrative law judges, as adjusted under 5 U.S.C. 5372(b)(4), are set forth on Schedule 10 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 7.
Effective Dates. Schedule 8 is effective on January 1, 2003. The other schedules contained herein are effective on the first day of the first applicable pay period beginning on or after January 1, 2003.Start Printed Page 1134
Sec. 8.
Prior Order Superseded. Executive Order 13249 of December 28, 2001, is superseded.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
December 31, 2002.
Start Printed Page 1135
Start Printed Page 1136
Start Printed Page 1137
Start Printed Page 1138
Start Printed Page 1139
Start Printed Page 1140
Start Printed Page 1141
Start Printed Page 1142
Executive Order 13283 of January 21, 2003
Establishing the Office of Global Communications
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment of the Office of Global Communications. There is hereby established within the White House Office an Office of Global Communications (the “Office”) to be headed by a Deputy Assistant to the President for Global Communications.
Sec. 2.
Mission. The mission of the Office shall be to advise the President, the heads of appropriate offices within the Executive Office of the President, and the heads of executive departments and agencies (agencies) on utilization of the most effective means for the United States Government to ensure consistency in messages that will promote the interests of the United States abroad, prevent misunderstanding, build support for and among coalition partners of the United States, and inform international audiences. The Office shall provide such advice on activities in which the role of the United States Government is apparent or publicly acknowledged.
Sec. 3.
Functions. In carrying out its mission:
(a) The Office shall assess the methods and strategies used by the United States Government (other than special activities as defined in Executive Order 12333 of December 4, 1981) to deliver information to audiences abroad. The Office shall coordinate the formulation among appropriate agencies of messages that reflect the strategic communications framework and priorities of the United States, and shall facilitate the development of a strategy among the appropriate agencies to effectively communicate such messages.
(b) The Office shall work with the policy and communications offices of agencies in developing a strategy for disseminating truthful, accurate, and effective messages about the United States, its Government and policies, and the American people and culture. The Office may, after consulting with the Department of State and obtaining the approval of the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs on the President's behalf, work with cooperating foreign governments in the development of the strategy. In performing its work, the Office shall coordinate closely and regularly with the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, or the Assistant's designee.
(c) The Office shall work with appropriate agencies to coordinate the creation of temporary teams of communicators for short-term placement in areas of high global interest and media attention as determined by the Office. Team members shall include personnel from agencies to the extent permitted by law and subject to the availability of personnel. In performing its functions, each information team shall work to disseminate accurate and timely information about topics of interest to the on-site news media, and assist media personnel in obtaining access to information, individuals, and events that reinforce the strategic communications objectives of the United States and its allies. The Office shall coordinate when and where information teams should be deployed; provided, however, no information team shall be deployed abroad without prior consultation with the Department of State and the Department of Defense, and prior notification to the Office of the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs.Start Printed Page 3372
(d) The Office shall encourage the use of state-of-the-art media and technology and shall advise the United States Government of events, technologies, and other communications tools that may be available for use in conveying information.
Sec. 4.
Administration. The Office of Administration within the Executive Office of the President shall provide the Office with administrative and related support, to the extent permitted by law and subject to the availability of appropriations, as directed by the Chief of Staff to the President to carry out the provisions of this order.
Sec. 5.
Relationship to Other Interagency Coordinating Mechanisms. Presidential direction regarding National Security Council-related mechanisms for coordination of national security policy shall apply with respect to the Office in the same manner as it applies with respect to other elements of the White House Office. Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect any function assigned by law or by the President to the National Security Council or to the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs.
Sec. 6.
Continuing Authorities. This order does not alter the existing authorities of any agency. Agencies shall assist the Deputy Assistant to the President for Global Communications, to the extent consistent with applicable law and direction of the President, and to the extent such assistance is consistent with national security objectives and with the mission of such agencies, in carrying out the Office's mission.
Sec. 7.
General Provisions.
(a) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity by any party against the United States, its agencies, instrumentalities or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
(b) Nothing in this order shall be construed to grant to the Office any authority to issue direction to agencies, officers, or employees.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13284 of January 23, 2003
Amendment of Executive Orders, and Other Actions, in Connection With the Establishment of the Department of Homeland Security
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-296), and the National Security Act of 1947, as amended (50 U.S.C. 401 et seq.), and in order to reflect responsibilities vested in the Secretary of Homeland Security and take other actions in connection with the establishment of the Department of Homeland Security, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Executive Order 13234 of November 9, 2001 (“Presidential Task Force on Citizen Preparedness in the War on Terrorism”), is amended by inserting “the Department of Homeland Security,” after “the Office of Management and Budget,” in section 2(a).
Sec. 2. Executive Order 13231 of October 16, 2001 (“Critical Infrastructure Protection in the Information Age”), is amended by:
(a) inserting “(i) Secretary of Homeland Security;” after “or their designees:” in section 6(a); and
(b) renumbering the subsequent subsections in section 6(a) appropriately.
Sec. 3. Executive Order 13228 of October 8, 2001 (“Establishing the Office of Homeland Security and the Homeland Security Council”), is amended by inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security,” after “the Secretary of Transportation,” in section 5(b). Further, during the period from January 24, 2003, until March 1, 2003, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall have the responsibility for coordinating the domestic response efforts otherwise assigned to the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security pursuant to section 3(g) of Executive Order 13228.
Sec. 4. Executive Order 13224 of September 23, 2001 (“Blocking Property and Prohibiting Transactions with Persons Who Commit, Threaten to Commit, or Support Terrorism”), as amended, is further amended by:
(a) inserting “, the Secretary of Homeland Security,” after “the Secretary of the Treasury” in sections 1(b) and 1(d) (the first time it appears); and
(b) inserting “, the Secretary of Homeland Security,” after “the Secretary of State” in sections 1(c) and 1(d) (the second time it appears), 5 (wherever it appears), and 7.
Sec. 5. Executive Order 13151 of April 27, 2000 (“Global Disaster Information Network”), is amended by:
(a) inserting “(8) Department of Homeland Security;” after “(7) Department of Energy;” in section 2(a); and
(b) renumbering the subsequent subsections in section 2(a) appropriately.
Sec. 6. Executive Order 13122 of May 25, 1999 (“Interagency Task Force on the Economic Development of the Southwest Border”), is amended by inserting “Secretary of Homeland Security,” after “Secretary of the Treasury,” in section 1(b).
Sec. 7. Executive Order 13048 of June 10, 1997 (“Improving Administrative Management in the Executive Branch”), is amended by:
(a) inserting “15. Department of Homeland Security;” after “14. Department of Veterans Affairs;” in section 1(a); andStart Printed Page 4076
(b) renumbering all subsequent subsections in section 1(a) appropriately.
Sec. 8. Executive Order 12992 of March 15, 1996 (“President's Council on Counter-Narcotics”), as amended, is further amended by:
(a) inserting “(n) Secretary of Homeland Security;” after “(m) Secretary of Veterans Affairs;” in section 2; and
(b) relettering all subsequent subsections in section 2 appropriately.
Sec. 9. Executive Order 12881 of November 23, 1993 (“Establishment of the National Science and Technology Council”), is amended by:
(a) inserting “(i) Secretary of Homeland Security;” after “(h) Secretary of the Interior;” in section 2; and
(b) relettering all subsequent subsections in section 2 appropriately.
Sec. 10. Executive Order 12859 of August 16, 1993 (“Establishment of the Domestic Policy Council”), is amended by:
(a) inserting “(o) Secretary of Homeland Security;” after “(n) Secretary of the Treasury;” in section 2; and
(b) relettering all subsequent subsections in section 2 appropriately.
Sec. 11. Executive Order 12590 of March 26, 1987 (“National Drug Policy Board”), is amended by:
(a) inserting “(13) the Secretary of Homeland Security;” after “(12) the Secretary of Education;” in section 1(b); and
(b) renumbering all subsequent subsections in section 1(b) appropriately.
Sec. 12. Executive Order 12260 of December 31, 1980 (“Agreement on Government Procurement”), as amended, is further amended by:
(a) inserting “14. Department of Homeland Security” after “13. Department of Health and Human Services” in the Annex; and
(b) renumbering all subsequent subsections in the Annex appropriately.
Sec. 13. Executive Order 11958 of January 18, 1977 (“Administration of Arms Export Controls”), as amended, is further amended by:
(a) striking “Secretary of the Treasury” wherever it appears in section 1(l)(2) and inserting “Attorney General” in lieu thereof; and
(b) inserting “the Attorney General,” after “the Secretary of the Treasury,” in section 2(a).
Sec. 14. Executive Order 11423 of August 16, 1968 (“Providing for the Performance of Certain Functions Heretofore Performed by the President with Respect to Certain Facilities Constructed and Maintained on the Borders of the United States”), as amended, is further amended by inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security,” after “the Secretary of Transportation,” in section 1(b).
Sec. 15. Executive Order 10865 of February 20, 1960 (“Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry”), as amended, is further amended by inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security,” after “the Secretary of Energy,” in section 1.
Sec. 16. Executive Order 13011 of July 16, 1996 (“Federal Information Technology”), is amended by:
(a) inserting “15. Department of Homeland Security;” after “14. Department of Veterans Affairs;” in section 3(b); and
(b) renumbering all subsequent subsections in section 3(b) appropriately.
Sec. 17. Those elements of the Department of Homeland Security that are supervised by the Department's Under Secretary for Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection through the Department's Assistant Secretary for Information Analysis, with the exception of those functions that involve no analysis of foreign intelligence information, are designated as elements of the Intelligence Community under section 201(h) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 and section 3(4) of the National Security Act of 1947, as amended (50 U.S.C. 401a).Start Printed Page 4077
Sec. 18. Executive Order 12333 of December 4, 1981 (“United States Intelligence Activities”), is amended in Part 3.4(f) by:
(a) striking “and” at the end of subpart 3.4(f)(6);
(b) striking the period and inserting “; and” at the end of subpart 3.4(f)(7); and
(c) adding a new subpart 3.4(f)(8) to read as follows: “(8) Those elements of the Department of Homeland Security that are supervised by the Department's Under Secretary for Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection through the Department's Assistant Secretary for Information Analysis, with the exception of those functions that involve no analysis of foreign intelligence information.”
Sec. 19.
Functions of Certain Officials in the Department of Homeland Security.
The Secretary of Homeland Security, the Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security, the Under Secretary for Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection, Department of Homeland Security, and the Assistant Secretary for Information Analysis, Department of Homeland Security, each shall be considered a “Senior Official of the Intelligence Community” for purposes of Executive Order 12333, and all other relevant authorities, and shall:
(a) recognize and give effect to all current clearances for access to classified information held by those who become employees of the Department of Homeland Security by operation of law pursuant to the Homeland Security Act of 2002 or by Presidential appointment;
(b) recognize and give effect to all current clearances for access to classified information held by those in the private sector with whom employees of the Department of Homeland Security may seek to interact in the discharge of their homeland security-related responsibilities;
(c) make all clearance and access determinations pursuant to Executive Order 12968 of August 2, 1995, or any successor Executive Order, as to employees of, and applicants for employment in, the Department of Homeland Security who do not then hold a current clearance for access to classified information; and
(d) ensure all clearance and access determinations for those in the private sector with whom employees of the Department of Homeland Security may seek to interact in the discharge of their homeland security-related responsibilities are made in accordance with Executive Order 12829 of January 6, 1993.
Sec. 20. Pursuant to the provisions of section 1.4 of Executive Order 12958 of April 17, 1995 (“Classified National Security Information”), I hereby authorize the Secretary of Homeland Security to classify information originally as “Top Secret.” Any delegation of this authority shall be in accordance with section 1.4 of that order or any successor Executive Orders.
Sec. 21. This order shall become effective on January 24, 2003.Start Printed Page 4078
Sec. 22. This order does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity, against the United States, its departments, agencies, or other entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13285 of January 29, 2003
President's Council on Service and Civic Participation
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to encourage the recognition of volunteer service and civic participation by all Americans, and especially America's youth, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
The President's Council on Service and Civic Participation. (a) There is hereby established within the Corporation for National and Community Services (CNCS) the President's Council on Service and Civic Participation (Council).
(b) The Council shall be composed of up to 25 members, including representatives of America's youth, appointed by the President. Each member shall serve for a term of 2 years and may continue to serve after the expiration of their term until a successor is appointed. The President shall designate one member to serve as Chair and one member to serve as Vice Chair. Subject to the direction of the Chief Executive Officer of the CNCS, the Chair, and in the Chair's absence the Vice Chair, shall convene and preside at the meetings of the Council, determine its agenda, and direct its work.
Sec. 2.
Mission and Functions of the Council.
(a) The mission of the Council shall be to:
(i) encourage the recognition of outstanding volunteer service and civic participation by individuals, schools, and organizations and thereby encourage more such activity, especially on the part of America's youth; and
(ii) facilitate awareness of the ways in which Americans throughout our history have helped to meet the vital needs of their communities and Nation through volunteer service and civic participation.
(b) In carrying out its mission, the Council shall:
(i) design and recommend programs to recognize individuals, schools, and organizations that excel in their efforts to support volunteer service and civic participation, especially with respect to students in primary schools, secondary schools, and institutions of higher learning;
(ii) exchange information and ideas with interested individuals and organizations on ways to expand and improve programs developed pursuant to subsection 2(b)(i) of this order;
(iii) advise the Chief Executive Officer of the CNCS on broad dissemination, especially among schools and youth organizations, of information regarding recommended practices for the promotion of volunteer service and civic participation, and other relevant educational and promotional materials;
(iv) monitor and advise the Chief Executive Officer of the CNCS on the need for the enhancement of materials disseminated pursuant to subsection 2(b)(iii) of this order; and
(v) make recommendations from time to time to the President, through the Director of the USA Freedom Corps, on ways to promote and recognize outstanding volunteer service and civic participation by individuals, schools, and organizations and to promote awareness of the ways in which Americans throughout our history have helped to meet the vital needs of their communities and Nation through volunteer service and civic participation.Start Printed Page 5204
Sec. 3.
Administration. (a) Each Federal agency, to the extent permitted by law and subject to the availability of appropriations, shall furnish such information and assistance to the Council as the Council may, with the approval of the Director of the USA Freedom Corps, request.
(b) The members of the Council shall serve without compensation for their work on the Council. Members of the Council who are not officers or employees of the United States may receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in the Government (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707).
(c) To the extent permitted by law, the Chief Executive Officer of the CNCS shall furnish the Council with necessary staff, supplies, facilities, and other administrative services and shall pay the expenses of the Council.
(d) The Chief Executive Officer of the CNCS shall appoint an Executive Director to head the staff of the Council.
(e) The Council, with the approval of the Chief Executive Officer of the CNCS, may establish subcommittees of the Council, consisting exclusively of members of the Council, as appropriate to aid the Council in carrying out its mission under this order.
Sec. 4.
General Provisions. (a) Insofar as the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.) (Act), may apply to the administration of any portion of this order, any functions of the President under the Act, except that of reporting to the Congress, shall be performed by the Chief Executive Officer of CNCS in accordance with the guidelines and procedures issued by the Administrator of General Services.
(b) Unless extended by the President, this order shall expire 2 years from the date of this order.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13286 of February 28, 2003
Amendment of Executive Orders, and Other Actions, in Connection With the Transfer of Certain Functions to the Secretary of Homeland Security
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-296) and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and in order to reflect the transfer of certain functions to, and other responsibilities vested in, the Secretary of Homeland Security, the transfer of certain agencies and agency components to the Department of Homeland Security, and the delegation of appropriate responsibilities to the Secretary of Homeland Security, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Executive Order 13276 of November 15, 2002 (“Delegation of Responsibilities Concerning Undocumented Aliens Interdicted or Intercepted in the Caribbean Region”), is amended by:
(a) striking “The Attorney General” wherever it appears in section 1 and inserting “The Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof; and
(b) striking “the Attorney General” wherever it appears in section 1 and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 2. Executive Order 13274 of September 18, 2002 (“Environmental Stewardship and Transportation Infrastructure Project Reviews”), is amended by inserting “Secretary of Homeland Security,” after “Secretary of Defense,” in section 3(b).
Sec. 3. Executive Order 13271 of July 9, 2002 (“Establishment of the Corporate Fraud Task Force”), is amended by:
(a) inserting “(b) the Secretary of Homeland Security;” after “(a) the Secretary of the Treasury;” in section 4; and
(b) relettering the subsequent subsections in section 4 appropriately.
Sec. 4. Executive Order 13260 of March 19, 2002 (“Establishing the President's Homeland Security Advisory Council and Senior Advisory Committees for Homeland Security”), is amended by:
(a) striking “the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security (Assistant)” in section 1(c) and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security (Secretary)” in lieu thereof;
(b) striking “the Assistant” wherever it appears in sections 2 and 3 and inserting “the Secretary” in lieu thereof;
(c) striking “the Office of Administration” in section 3(d) and inserting “the Department of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof;
(d) striking “the Administrator of General Services” in section 4(a) and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof; and
(e) inserting “of General Services” after “Administrator” in section 4(a).
Executive Order 13260 of March 19, 2002, is hereby revoked effective as of March 31, 2003.
Sec. 5. Executive Order 13257 of February 13, 2002 (“President's Interagency Task Force to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons”), is amended by:
(a) inserting “(v) the Secretary of Homeland Security;” after “(iv) the Secretary of Health and Human Services;” in section 1(b); andStart Printed Page 10620
(b) renumbering the subsequent subsections in section 1(b) appropriately.
Sec. 6. Executive Order 13254 of January 29, 2002 (“Establishing the USA Freedom Corps”), is amended by striking “Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency;” in section 3(b)(viii) and inserting “Secretary of Homeland Security;” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 7. Executive Order 13231 of October 16, 2001 (“Critical Infrastructure Protection in the Information Age”), as amended, is further amended to read in its entirety as follows:
“Critical Infrastructure Protection in the Information Age
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to ensure protection of information systems for critical infrastructure, including emergency preparedness communications and the physical assets that support such systems, in the information age, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. The information technology revolution has changed the way business is transacted, government operates, and national defense is conducted. Those three functions now depend on an interdependent network of critical information infrastructures. It is the policy of the United States to protect against disruption of the operation of information systems for critical infrastructure and thereby help to protect the people, economy, essential human and government services, and national security of the United States, and to ensure that any disruptions that occur are infrequent, of minimal duration, and manageable, and cause the least damage possible. The implementation of this policy shall include a voluntary public-private partnership, involving corporate and nongovernmental organizations.
Sec. 2.
Continuing Authorities. This order does not alter the existing authorities or roles of United States Government departments and agencies. Authorities set forth in 44 U.S.C. chapter 35, and other applicable law, provide senior officials with responsibility for the security of Federal Government information systems.
(a) Executive Branch Information Systems Security. The Director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) has the responsibility to develop and oversee the implementation of government-wide policies, principles, standards, and guidelines for the security of information systems that support the executive branch departments and agencies, except those noted in section 2(b) of this order. The Director of OMB shall advise the President and the appropriate department or agency head when there is a critical deficiency in the security practices within the purview of this section in an executive branch department or agency.
(b) National Security Information Systems. The Secretary of Defense and the Director of Central Intelligence (DCI) shall have responsibility to oversee, develop, and ensure implementation of policies, principles, standards, and guidelines for the security of information systems that support the operations under their respective control. In consultation with the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs and the affected departments and agencies, the Secretary of Defense and the DCI shall develop policies, principles, standards, and guidelines for the security of national security information systems that support the operations of other executive branch departments and agencies with national security information.
(i) Policies, principles, standards, and guidelines developed under this subsection may require more stringent protection than those developed in accordance with section 2(a) of this order.
(ii) The Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs shall advise the President and the appropriate department or agency when there is a critical deficiency in the security practices of a department or agency within the purview of this section.
(iii) National Security Systems. The National Security Telecommunications and Information Systems Security Committee, as established by Start Printed Page 10621and consistent with NSD-42 and chaired by the Department of Defense, shall be designated as the “Committee on National Security Systems.”
(c) Additional Responsibilities. The heads of executive branch departments and agencies are responsible and accountable for providing and maintaining adequate levels of security for information systems, including emergency preparedness communications systems, for programs under their control. Heads of such departments and agencies shall ensure the development and, within available appropriations, funding of programs that adequately address these mission systems, especially those critical systems that support the national security and other essential government programs. Additionally, security should enable, and not unnecessarily impede, department and agency business operations.
Sec. 3.
The National Infrastructure Advisory Council. The National Infrastructure Advisory Council (NIAC), established on October 16, 2001, shall provide the President through the Secretary of Homeland Security with advice on the security of information systems for critical infrastructure supporting other sectors of the economy: banking and finance, transportation, energy, manufacturing, and emergency government services.
(a) Membership. The NIAC shall be composed of not more than 30 members appointed by the President. The members of the NIAC shall be selected from the private sector, academia, and State and local government. Members of the NIAC shall have expertise relevant to the functions of the NIAC and generally shall be selected from industry Chief Executive Officers (and equivalently ranked leaders of other organizations) with responsibilities for security of information infrastructure supporting the critical sectors of the economy, including banking and finance, transportation, energy, communications, and emergency government services. Members shall not be full-time officials or employees of the executive branch of the Federal Government. The President shall designate a Chair and Vice Chair from among the members of the NIAC.
(b) Functions of the NIAC. The NIAC will meet periodically to:
(i) enhance the partnership of the public and private sectors in protecting information systems for critical infrastructures and provide reports on this issue to the Secretary of Homeland Security, as appropriate;
(ii) propose and develop ways to encourage private industry to perform periodic risk assessments of critical information and telecommunications systems;
(iii) monitor the development of private sector Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs) and provide recommendations to the President through the Secretary of Homeland Security on how these organizations can best foster improved cooperation among the ISACs, the Department of Homeland Security, and other Federal Government entities;
(iv) report to the President through the Secretary of Homeland Security, who shall ensure appropriate coordination with the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security, the Assistant to the President for Economic Policy, and the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs under the terms of this order; and
(v) advise lead agencies with critical infrastructure responsibilities, sector coordinators, the Department of Homeland Security, and the ISACs.
(c) Administration of the NIAC.
(i) The NIAC may hold hearings, conduct inquiries, and establish subcommittees, as appropriate.
(ii) Upon request of the Chair, and to the extent permitted by law, the heads of the executive departments and agencies shall provide the NIAC with information and advice relating to its functions.
(iii) Senior Federal Government officials may participate in the meetings of the NIAC, as appropriate.Start Printed Page 10622
(iv) Members shall serve without compensation for their work on the NIAC. However, members may be reimbursed for travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in Federal Government service (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707).
(v) To the extent permitted by law and subject to the availability of appropriations, the Department of Homeland Security shall provide the NIAC with administrative services, staff, and other support services, and such funds as may be necessary for the performance of the NIAC's functions.
(d) General Provisions.
(i) Insofar as the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.) (Act), may apply to the NIAC, the functions of the President under that Act, except that of reporting to the Congress, shall be performed by the Department of Homeland Security in accordance with the guidelines and procedures established by the Administrator of General Services.
(ii) The NIAC shall terminate on October 15, 2003, unless extended by the President.
(iii) Executive Order 13130 of July 14, 1999, was revoked on October 16, 2001.
(iv) Nothing in this order shall supersede any requirement made by or under law.
Sec. 4.
Judicial Review. This order does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, against the United States, its depart ments, agencies, or other entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.”
Sec. 8.
Executive Order 13228 of October 8, 2001 (“Establishing the Office of Homeland Security and the Homeland Security Council”), as amended, is further amended by:
(a) amending section 3(g) to read “(g) Incident Management. Consistent with applicable law, including the statutory functions of the Secretary of Homeland Security, the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security shall be the official primarily responsible for advising and assisting the President in the coordination of domestic incident management activities of all departments and agencies in the event of a terrorist threat, and during and in the aftermath of terrorist attacks, major disasters, or other emergencies, within the United States. Generally, the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security shall serve as the principal point of contact for and to the President with respect to the coordination of such activities. The Assistant to the President for Homeland Security shall coordinate with the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, as appropriate.”; and
(b) inserting “, including the Department of Homeland Security” after “Government departments and agencies” in section 7.
Sec. 9.
Executive Order 13223 of September 14, 2001 (“Ordering the Ready Reserve of the Armed Forces to Active Duty and Delegating Certain Authorities to the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Transportation”), as amended, is further amended by:
(a) striking “the Secretary of Transportation” in the title and wherever it appears in sections 1, 5, 6, and 7, and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof; and
(b) striking “the Department of Transportation” in section 7 and inserting “the Department of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 10.
Executive Order 13212 of May 18, 2001 (“Actions to Expedite Energy-Related Projects”), is amended by inserting “Homeland Security,” after “Veterans Affairs,” in section 3.
Sec. 11.
Executive Order 13165 of August 9, 2000 (“Creation of the White House Task Force on Drug Use in Sports and Authorization for the Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy to Serve as the United States Start Printed Page 10623Government's Representative on the Board of the World Anti-Doping Agency”), is amended by inserting “the Department of Homeland Security,” after “the Department of Transportation,” in section 2.
Sec. 12.
Executive Order 13154 of May 3, 2000 (“Establishing the Kosovo Campaign Medal”), is amended by striking “the Secretary of Transportation” in section 1 and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 13.
Executive Order 13133 of August 5, 1999 (“Working Group on Unlawful Conduct on the Internet”), is amended by:
(a) inserting “(6) The Secretary of Homeland Security.” after “(5) The Secretary of Education.” in section 3(a); and
(b) renumbering the subsequent subsections in section 3(a) appropriately.
Sec. 14.
Executive Order 13120 of April 27, 1999 (“Ordering the Selected Reserve and Certain Individual Ready Reserve Members of the Armed Forces to Active Duty”), is amended by striking “the Secretary of Transportation” and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 15.
Executive Order 13112 of February 3, 1999 (“Invasive Species”), is amended by inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security,” after “Secretary of Transportation,” in section 3(a).
Sec. 16.
Executive Order 13100 of August 25, 1998 (“President's Council on Food Safety”), is amended by inserting “and Homeland Security,” after “Health and Human Services,” in section 1(a).
Sec. 17.
Executive Order 13076 of February 24, 1998 (“Ordering the Selected Reserve of the Armed Forces to Active Duty”), is amended by striking “the Secretary of Transportation” and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 18.
Executive Order 13011 of July 16, 1996 (“Federal Information Technology”), as amended, is further amended by:
(a) striking “17. Federal Emergency Management Agency;” in section 3(b); and
(b) renumbering the subsequent subsections in section 3(b) appropriately.
Sec. 19.
Executive Order 12989 of February 13, 1996 (“Economy and Efficiency in Government Procurement through Compliance with Certain Immigration and Naturalization Act Provisions”), is amended by:
(a) striking “Naturalization” in the title and inserting “Nationality” in lieu thereof;
(b) striking “, the Attorney General” in section 3;
(c) inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” before “may” in section 3(a);
(d) inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” before “shall” in section 3(b);
(e) inserting “the Attorney General” before “shall” in section 3(c);
(f) inserting “Secretary of Homeland Security or the” before “Attorney General” wherever it appears in section 4;
(g) striking “The Attorney General's” in section 4(b) and inserting “Such” in lieu thereof;
(h) striking “the Attorney General” wherever it appears in the first two sentences of section 5(a) and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security and Attorney General” in lieu thereof;
(i) striking “the responsibilities of the Attorney General” in section 5(a) and inserting “their respective responsibilities” in lieu thereof;
(j) inserting “Secretary of Homeland Security or the” before “Attorney General” wherever in appears in the third sentence of section 5(a);Start Printed Page 10624
(k) inserting “Secretary of Homeland Security and the” before “Attorney General” in section 6;
(l) striking “the Attorney General's” in section 6 and inserting “their respective” in lieu thereof; and
(m) inserting “Secretary of Homeland Security, the” before “Attorney General” in section 7.
Sec. 20.
Executive Order 12985 of January 11, 1996 (“Establishing the Armed Forces Service Medal”), is amended by striking “the Secretary of Transportation” in section 2 and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 21.
Executive Order 12982 of December 8, 1995 (“Ordering the Selected Reserve of the Armed Forces to Active Duty”), is amended by striking “the Secretary of Transportation” and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 22.
Executive Order 12978 of October 21, 1995 (“Blocking Assets and Prohibiting Transactions with Significant Narcotics Traffickers”), is amended by inserting “, the Secretary of Homeland Security,” after “the Attorney General” wherever it appears in sections 1 and 4.
Sec. 23.
Executive Order 12977 of October 19, 1995 (“Interagency Security Committee”), is amended by:
(a) striking “the Administrator of General Services (“Administrator”)” in section 1(a) and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security (“Secretary”)” in lieu thereof;
(b) striking “and” after “(16) Central Intelligence Agency;” in section 1(b);
(c) inserting “and (18) General Services Administration;” after “(17) Office of Management and Budget;” in section 1(b);
(d) striking section 1(c)(2) and redesignating sections 1(c)(3) and 1(c)(4) as sections 1(c)(2) and 1(c)(3), respectively;
(e) striking “Administrator” wherever it appears in sections 2, 5(a)(3)(E), 6(a), and 6(c), and inserting “Secretary” in lieu thereof; and
(f) striking “, acting by and through the Assistant Commissioner,” in section 6(c).
Sec. 24.
Executive Order 12919 of June 3, 1994 (“National Defense Industrial Resources Preparedness”), is amended by:
(a) striking “The Director, Federal Emergency Management Agency (“Director, FEMA”)” in section 104(b) and inserting “The Secretary of Homeland Security (“the Secretary”)” in lieu thereof;
(b) striking “The Director, FEMA,” in sections 201(c) and 601(f) and inserting “The Secretary” in lieu thereof;
(c) striking “the Director, FEMA,” wherever it appears in sections 201(e), 202(c), 305, 501, 701(e), and 802(e), and inserting “the Secretary” in lieu thereof; and
(d) inserting “the Department of Homeland Security,” after “Attorney General,” in section 801.
Sec. 25.
Executive Order 12906 of April 11, 1994 (“Coordinating Geographic Data Acquisition and Access: The National Spatial Data Infrastructure”), is amended by:
(a) striking “and” in section 7(b)(ii);
(b) striking the period at the end of section 7(b)(iii) and inserting “; and” in lieu thereof; and
(c) inserting a new section 7(b)(iv) to read “(iv) the national security-related activities of the Department of Homeland Security as determined by the Secretary of Homeland Security.”.Start Printed Page 10625
Sec. 26.
Executive Order 12870 of September 30, 1993 (“Trade Promotion Coordinating Committee”), is amended by:
(a) inserting “(j) Department of Homeland Security;” after “(i) Department of the Interior;” in section 1; and
(b) relettering the subsequent subsections in section 1 appropriately.
Sec. 27.
Executive Order 12835 of January 25, 1993 (“Establishment of the National Economic Council”), is amended by:
(a) inserting “(k) Secretary of Homeland Security;” after “(j) Secretary of Energy;” in section 2; and
(b) relettering the subsequent subsections in section 2 appropriately.
Sec. 28.
Executive Order 12830 of January 9, 1993 (“Establishing the Military Outstanding Volunteer Service Medal”), is amended by striking “the Secretary of Transportation” wherever it appears and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 29.
Executive Order 12824 of December 7, 1992 (“Establishing the Transportation Distinguished Service Medal”), is amended by:
(a) striking “Transportation” in the title and inserting “Homeland Security” in lieu thereof; and
(b) striking “Transportation” wherever it appears and inserting “Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 30.
Executive Order 12807 of May 24, 1992 (“Interdiction of Illegal Aliens”), is amended by striking “the Attorney General” in section 2(c)(3) and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 31.
Executive Order 12793 of March 20, 1992 (“Continuing the Presidential Service Certificate and Presidential Service Badge”), is amended by striking “the Secretary of Transportation” in section 1 and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 32.
Executive Order 12789 of February 10, 1992 (“Delegation of Reporting Functions Under the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986”), is amended by striking “The Attorney General” in section 1 and inserting “The Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 33.
Executive Order 12788 of January 15, 1992 (“Defense Economic Adjustment Program”), is amended by:
(a) inserting “(15) Secretary of Homeland Security;” after “(14) Secretary of Veterans Affairs;” in section 4(a); and
(b) renumbering the subsequent subsections in section 4(a) appropriately.
Sec. 34.
Executive Order 12777 of October 18, 1991 (“Implementation of Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of October 18, 1972, as Amended, and the Oil Pollution Act of 1990”), is amended by:
(a) inserting “and the Secretary of the Department in which the Coast Guard is operating” after “the Secretary of Transportation” in sections 2(b)(2) and 2(d)(2);
(b) striking “the Secretary of Transportation” in section 2(e)(2) and wherever it appears in sections 5 and 8 and inserting “the Secretary of the Department in which the Coast Guard is operating” in lieu thereof; and
(c) inserting “the Secretary of the Department in which the Coast Guard is operating,” after “Agriculture,” in section 10(c).
Sec. 35.
Executive Order 12743 of January 18, 1991 (“Ordering the Ready Reserve of the Armed Forces to Active Duty”), is amended by:
(a) striking “the Department of Transportation” in section 1 and inserting “the Department of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof; and
(b) striking “the Secretary of Transportation” in section 1 and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 36.
Executive Order 12742 of January 8, 1991 (“National Security Industrial Responsiveness”), is amended by:Start Printed Page 10626
(a) inserting “Homeland Security,” after “Transportation,” in section 104(a); and
(b) striking “the Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency” in section 104(d) and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 37.
Executive Order 12733 of November 13, 1990 (“Authorizing the Extension of the Period of Active Duty of Personnel of the Selected Reserve of the Armed Forces”), is amended by striking “the Secretary of Transportation” and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 38.
Executive Order 12728 of August 22, 1990 (“Delegating the President's Authority to Suspend any Provision of Law Relating to the Promotion, Retirement, or Separation of Members of the Armed Forces”), is amended by striking “the Secretary of Transportation” in sections 1 and 2 and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 39.
Executive Order 12727 of August 27, 1990 (“Ordering the Selected Reserve of the Armed Forces to Active Duty”), is amended by striking “the Secretary of Transportation” in section 1 and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 40.
Executive Order 12699 (“Seismic Safety of Federal and Federally Assisted or Regulated New Building Construction”), is amended by:
(a) striking “Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)” in section 3(d) and inserting “Department of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof;
(b) striking “The Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency” in section 4(a) and inserting “The Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof; and
(c) striking “The Federal Emergency Management Agency” and “The FEMA” in section 5 and inserting “The Department of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof (in both places).
Sec. 41.
Executive Order 12657 of November 18, 1988 (“Federal Emergency Management Agency Assistance in Emergency Preparedness Planning at Commercial Nuclear Power Plants”), is amended by:
(a) striking “Federal Emergency Management Agency” in the title and inserting “Department of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof;
(b) striking “Federal Emergency Management Agency (“FEMA”)” in section 1(b) and inserting “Department of Homeland Security (“DHS”)” in lieu thereof;
(c) striking “FEMA” wherever it appears in sections 1(b), 2(b), 2(c), 3, 4, 5, and 6, and inserting “DHS” in lieu thereof; and
(d) striking “the Director of FEMA” in section 2(a) and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 42.
Executive Order 12656 of November 18, 1988 (“Assignment of Emergency Preparedness Responsibilities”), as amended, is further amended by:
(a) striking “The Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency” wherever it appears in sections 104(c) and 1702 and inserting “The Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof;
(b) striking “the Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency” wherever it appears in sections 104(c), 201(15), 301(9), 401(10), 501(4), 501(7), 502(7), 601(3), 701(5), 801(9), 1302(4), 1401(4), 1701, and 1801(b), and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof;
(c) striking “consistent with current National Security Council guidelines and policies” in section 201(15) and inserting “consistent with current Presidential guidelines and policies” in lieu thereof;
(d) striking “Secretary” in section 501(9) and inserting “Secretaries” in lieu thereof;
(e) inserting “and Homeland Security” after “Labor” in section 501(9);Start Printed Page 10627
(f) striking “and” after “State” in section 701(6) and inserting a comma in lieu thereof;
(g) inserting “, and Homeland Security” after “Defense” in section 701(6);
(h) striking “the Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency,” in section 701(6); and
(i) striking “Federal Emergency Management Agency” in the title of Part 17 and inserting “Department of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Without prejudice to subsections (a) through (i) of this section, all responsibilities assigned to specific Federal officials pursuant to Executive Order 12656 that are substantially the same as any responsibility assigned to, or function transferred to, the Secretary of Homeland Security pursuant to the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (regardless of whether such responsibility or function is expressly required to be carried out through another official of the Department of Homeland Security or not pursuant to such Act), or intended or required to be carried out by an agency or an agency component transferred to the Department of Homeland Security pursuant to such Act, are hereby reassigned to the Secretary of Homeland Security.
Sec. 43.
Executive Order 12580 of January 23, 1987 (“Superfund Implementation”), as amended, is further amended by:
(a) inserting “Department of Homeland Security,” after Department of Energy,” in section 1(a)(2); and
(b) striking “Federal Emergency Management Agency” in section 1(a)(2).
Sec. 44. Executive Order 12555 of November 15, 1985 (“Protection of Cultural Property”), as amended, is further amended by:
(a) striking “the Secretary of the Treasury” in sections 1, 2, and 3, and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof; and
(b) striking “The Department of the Treasury” in the heading of section 3 and inserting “The Department of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 45. Executive Order 12501 of January 28, 1985 (“Arctic Research”), is amended by:
(a) inserting “(i) Department of Homeland Security;” after “(h) Department of Health and Human Services;” in section 8; and
(b) relettering the subsequent subsections in section 8 appropriately.
Sec. 46. Executive Order 12472 of April 3, 1984 (“Assignment of National Security and Emergency Preparedness Telecommunications Functions”), is amended by:
(a) inserting “the Homeland Security Council,” after “National Security Council,” in sections 1(b), 1(e)(4), 1(f)(3), and 2(c)(4);
(b) striking “The Secretary of Defense” in section 1(e) and inserting “The Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof;
(c) striking “Federal Emergency Management Agency” in sections 1(e)(3) and 3(j) and inserting “Department of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof;
(d) inserting “, in consultation with the Homeland Security Council,” after “National Security Council” in section 2(b)(1);
(e) inserting “, the Homeland Security Council,” after “National Security Council” in sections 2(d) and 2(e);
(f) striking “the Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency” in section 2(d)(1) and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof;
(g) striking “Federal Emergency Management Agency. The Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency shall:” in section 3(b) and inserting “Department of Homeland Security. The Secretary of Homeland Security shall:” in lieu thereof; and
(h) adding at the end of section 3(d) the following new paragraph: “(3) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the Start Printed Page 10628authority of the Secretary of Defense with respect to the Department of Defense, including the chain of command for the armed forces of the United States under section 162(b) of title 10, United States Code, and the authority of the Secretary of Defense with respect to the Department of Defense under section 113(b) of that title.”.
Sec. 47. Executive Order 12382 of September 13, 1982 (“President's National Security Telecommunications Advisory Committee”), as amended, is further amended by:
(a) inserting “through the Secretary of Homeland Security,” after “the President,” in sections 2(a) and 2(b);
(b) striking “and to the Secretary of Defense” in section 2(e) and inserting “, through the Secretary of Homeland Security,” in lieu thereof; and
(c) striking “the Secretary of Defense” in sections 3(c) and 4(a) and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 48. Executive Order 12341 of January 21, 1982 (“Cuban and Haitian Entrants”), is amended by:
(a) striking “The Attorney General” in section 2 and inserting “The Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof; and
(b) striking “the Attorney General” in section 2 and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 49. Executive Order 12208 of April 15, 1980 (“Consultations on the Admission of Refugees”), as amended, is further amended by:
(a) striking “the following functions: (a) To” in section 1-101 and inserting “to” in lieu thereof;
(b) striking “the Attorney General” in section 1-101(a) and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof;
(c) striking sections 1-101(b) and 1-102; and
(d) redesignating sections 1-103 and 1-104 as sections 1-102 and 1-103, respectively.
Sec. 50. Executive Order 12188 of January 2, 1980 (“International Trade Functions”), as amended, is further amended by:
(a) inserting “(12) The Secretary of Homeland Security” after “(11) The Secretary of Energy” in section 1-102(b); and
(b) renumbering the subsequent subsections in section 1-102(b) appropriately.
Sec. 51. Executive Order 12160 of September 26, 1979 (“Providing for Enhancement and Coordination of Federal Consumer Programs”), as amended, is further amended by:
(a) inserting “(m) Department of Homeland Security.” after “(l) Department of the Treasury.” in section 1-102;
(b) striking “(s) Federal Emergency Management Agency.” in section 1-102; and
(c) relettering the subsequent subsections in section 1-102 appropriately.
Sec. 52. Executive Order 12148 of July 20, 1979 (“Federal Emergency Management”), as amended, is further amended by:
(a) striking “the Federal Emergency Management Agency” whenever it appears and inserting “the Department of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof; and
(b) striking “the Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency” wherever it appears and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 53. Executive Order 12146 of July 18, 1979 (“Management of Federal Legal Resources”), as amended, is further amended by:
(a) striking “15” in section 1-101 and inserting “16” in lieu thereof;
(b) inserting “(n) The Department of Homeland Security.” after “(m) The Department of the Treasury.” in section 1-102; andStart Printed Page 10629
(c) relettering the subsequent subsections in section 1-102 appropriately.
Sec. 54. Executive Order 12002 of July 7, 1977 (“Administration of Export Controls”), as amended, is further amended by inserting “, the Secretary of Homeland Security,” after “The Secretary of Energy” in section 3.
Sec. 55. Executive Order 11965 of January 19, 1977 (“Establishing the Humanitarian Service Medal”), is amended by striking “the Secretary of Transportation” wherever it appears in sections 1, 2, and 4, and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 56. Executive Order 11926 of July 19, 1976 (“The Vice Presidential Service Badge”), is amended by striking “the Secretary of Transportation” in section 2 and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 57. Executive Order 11858 of May 7, 1975 (“Foreign Investment in the United States”), as amended, is further amended by:
(a) inserting “(8) The Secretary of Homeland Security.” after “(7) The Attorney General.” in section 1(a); and
(b) redesignating subsection (8) as subsection (9) in section 1(a).
Sec. 58. Executive Order 11800 of August 17, 1974 (“Delegating Certain Authority Vested in the President by the Aviation Career Incentive Act of 1974”), as amended, is further amended by striking “the Secretary of Transportation” in section 1 and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 59. Executive Order 11645 of February 8, 1972 (“Authority of the Secretary of Transportation to Prescribe Certain Regulations Relating to Coast Guard Housing”), is amended by striking “the Secretary of Transportation” in the title and in sections 1 and 2 and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 60. Executive Order 11623 of October 12, 1971 (“Delegating to the Director of Selective Service Authority to Issue Rules and Regulations under the Military Selective Service Act”), as amended, is further amended by:
(a) striking “the Secretary of Transportation” in section 2(a) and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof; and
(b) striking “the Department of Transportation” in section 2(a) and inserting “the Department of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 61. Executive Order 11448 of January 16, 1969 (“Establishing the Meritorious Service Medal”), as amended, is further amended by striking “the Secretary of Transportation” in section 1 and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 62. Executive Order 11446 of January 16, 1969 (“Authorizing the Acceptance of Service Medals and Ribbons from Multilateral Organizations Other Than the United Nations”), is amended by striking “the Secretary of Transportation” and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 63. Executive Order 11438 of December 3, 1968 (“Prescribing Procedures Governing Interdepartmental Cash Awards to the Members of the Armed Forces”), as amended, is further amended by:
(a) striking “the Secretary of Transportation” in sections 1 and 2 and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof; and
(b) striking “the Department of Transportation” wherever it appears in sections 2 and 4 and inserting “the Department of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 64. Executive Order 11366 of August 4, 1967 (“Assigning Authority to Order Certain Persons in the Ready Reserve to Active Duty”), is amended by striking “The Secretary of Transportation” in sections 2 and 3(b) and inserting “The Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 65. Executive Order 11239 of July 31, 1965 (“Enforcement of the Convention for Safety of Life at Sea, 1960”), as amended, is further amended, Start Printed Page 10630without prejudice to section 1-106 of Executive Order 12234 of September 3, 1980 (“Enforcement of the Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea”), by:
(a) striking “the Secretary of Transportation” in sections 1, 3, and 4, and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof; and
(b) striking “The Secretary of Transportation” in sections 2 and 3 and inserting “The Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 66. Executive Order 11231 of July 8, 1965 (“Establishing the Vietnam Service Medal”), as amended, is further amended by striking “the Secretary of Transportation” in section 1 and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 67. Executive Order 11190 of December 29, 1964 (“Providing for the Screening of the Ready Reserve of the Armed Forces”), as amended, is further amended by striking “the Secretary of Transportation” in section 1 and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 68. Executive Order 11139 of January 7, 1964 (“Authorizing Acceptance of the United Nations Medal and Service Ribbon”), is amended by striking “the Secretary of the Treasury” and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 69. Executive Order 11079 of January 25, 1963 (“Providing for the Prescribing of Regulations under which Members of the Armed Forces and Others May Accept Fellowships, Scholarships or Grants”), as amended, is further amended by striking “the Secretary of Transportation” and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 70. Executive Order 11046 of August 24, 1962 (“Authorizing Award of the Bronze Star Medal”), as amended, is further amended by striking “the Secretary of Transportation” in section 1 and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 71. Executive Order 11016 of April 25, 1962 (“Authorizing Award of the Purple Heart”), as amended, is further amended by striking “the Secretary of Transportation” in sections 1 and 2 and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 72. Executive Order 10977 of December 4, 1961 (“Establishing the Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal”), as amended, is further amended by striking “the Secretary of Transportation” in section 2 and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 73. Executive Order 10789 of November 14, 1958 (“Authorizing Agencies of the Government To Exercise Certain Contracting Authority in Connection With National-Defense Functions and Prescribing Regulations Governing the Exercise of Such Authority”), as amended, is further amended by:
(a) striking “The Federal Emergency Management Agency” in paragraph 21 and inserting “Department of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof; and
(b) inserting at the end thereof the following new Part:
“Part III—Coordination with Other Authorities
25. After March 1, 2003, no executive department or agency shall exercise authority granted under paragraph 1A of this order with respect to any matter that has been, or could be, designated by the Secretary of Homeland Security as a qualified anti-terrorism technology as defined in section 865 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002, unless—
(a) in the case of the Department of Defense, the Secretary of Defense has, after consideration of the authority provided under subtitle G of title VIII of the Homeland Security Act of 2002, determined that the exercise of authority under this order is necessary for the timely and effective conduct of United States military or intelligence activities; and
(b) in the case of any other executive department or agency that has authority under this order, (i) the Secretary of Homeland Security has advised whether the use of the authority provided under subtitle G of title VIII Start Printed Page 10631of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 would be appropriate, and (ii) the Director of the Office and Management and Budget has approved the exercise of authority under this order.”.
Sec. 74. Executive Order 10694 of January 10, 1957 (“Authorizing the Secretaries of the Army, Navy, and Air Force to Issue Citations in the Name of the President of the United States to Military and Naval Units for Outstanding Performance in Action”), is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: “5. The Secretary of the Department in which the Coast Guard is operating may exercise the same authority with respect to the Coast Guard under this order as the Secretary of the Navy may exercise with respect to the Navy and the Marine Corps under this order.”.
Sec. 75. Executive Order 10637 of September 16, 1955 (“Delegating to the Secretary of the Treasury Certain Functions of the President Relating to the United States Coast Guard”), is amended by:
(a) striking “The Secretary of the Treasury” in sections 1 and 2 and inserting “The Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof;
(b) striking “the Secretary of the Treasury” in the title and in subsections 1(j), 1(k), and 5, and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof; and
(c) striking subsection 1(r) and redesignating subsection 1(s) as subsection 1(r).
Sec. 76. Executive Order 10631 of August 17, 1955 (“Code of Conduct for Members of the Armed Forces of the United States”), as amended, is further amended by: striking “the Secretary of Transportation” and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 77. Executive Order 10554 of August 18, 1954 (“Delegating the Authority of the President to Prescribe Regulations Authorizing Occasions Upon Which the Uniform May Be Worn by Persons Who Have Served Honorably in the Armed Forces in Time of War”), is amended by striking “the Secretary of the Treasury” and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 78. Executive Order 10499 of November 4, 1953 (“Delegating Functions Conferred Upon the President by Section 8 of the Uniformed Services Contingency Option Act of 1953”), as amended, is further amended by striking “the Treasury” in sections 1 and 2 and inserting “Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 79. Executive Order 10448 of April 22, 1953 (“Authorizing the National Defense Medal”), as amended, is further amended by striking “the Secretary of Transportation” in sections 1 and 2 and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 80. Executive Order 10271 of July 7, 1951 (“Delegating the Authority of the President to Order Members and Units of Reserve Components of the Armed Forces into Active Federal service”), is amended by striking “the Secretary of the Treasury” and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 81. Executive Order 10179 of November 8, 1950 (“Establishing the Korean Service Medal”), as amended, is further amended by striking “the Secretary of the Treasury” in sections 1 and 2 and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 82. Executive Order 10163 of September 25, 1950 (“The Armed Forces Reserve Medal”), as amended, is further amended by striking “the Secretary of the Treasury” in sections 2 and 7 and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 83. Executive Order 10113 of February 24, 1950 (“Delegating the Authority of the President to Prescribe Clothing Allowances, and Cash Allowances in lieu thereof, for Enlisted Men in the Armed Forces”), as amended, is further amended by striking “the Secretary of the Treasury” in sections 1 and 2 and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.Start Printed Page 10632
Sec. 84. Executive Order 4601 of March 1, 1927 (“Distinguished Flying Cross”), as amended, is further amended by:
(a) striking “The Secretary of War, the Secretary of the Navy,” in sections 2 and 12 and inserting “The Secretary of Defense” in lieu thereof; and
(b) striking “the Secretary of the Treasury” in sections 2 and 12 and inserting “the Secretary of Homeland Security” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 85.
Designation as a Defense Agency of the United States.
I hereby designate the Department of Homeland Security as a defense agency of the United States for the purposes of chapter 17 of title 35 of the United States Code.
Sec. 86.
Exception from the Provisions of the Government Employees Training Act.
Those elements of the Department of Homeland Security that are supervised by the Under Secretary of Homeland Security for Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection through the Department's Assistant Secretary for Information Analysis are, pursuant to section 4102(b)(1) of title 5, United States Code, and in the public interest, excepted from the following provisions of the Government Employees Training Act as codified in title 5: sections 4103(a)(1), 4108, 4115, 4117, and 4118, and that part of 4109(a) that provides “under the regulations prescribed under section 4118(a)(8) of this title and”.
Sec. 87.
Functions of Certain Officials in the Coast Guard.
The Commandant and the Assistant Commandant for Intelligence of the Coast Guard each shall be considered a “Senior Official of the Intelligence Community” for purposes of Executive Order 12333 of December 4, 1981, and all other relevant authorities.
Sec. 88.
Order of Succession.
Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, the officers named in subsection (a) of this section, in the order listed, shall act as, and perform the functions and duties of, the office of Secretary of Homeland Security (“Secretary”) during any period in which the Secretary has died, resigned, or otherwise become unable to perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary.
(a) Order of Succession.
(i) Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security;
(ii) Under Secretary for Border and Transportation Security;
(iii) Under Secretary for Emergency Preparedness and Response;
(iv) Under Secretary for Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection;
(v) Under Secretary for Management;
(vi) Under Secretary for Science and Technology;
(vii) General Counsel; and
(viii) Assistant Secretaries in the Department in the order of their date of appointment as such.
(b) Exceptions.
(i) No individual who is serving in an office listed in subsection (a) in an acting capacity shall act as Secretary pursuant to this section.
(ii) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the President retains discretion, to the extent permitted by the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, 5 U.S.C. 3345 et seq., to depart from this order in designating an acting Secretary.
Sec. 89.
Savings Provision.
Except as otherwise specifically provided above or in Executive Order 13284 of January 23, 2003 (“Amendment of Executive Orders, and Other Actions, in Connection With the Establishment of the Department of Homeland Security”), references in any prior Executive Order relating to an agency or Start Printed Page 10633an agency component that is transferred to the Department of Homeland Security (“the Department”), or relating to a function that is transferred to the Secretary of Homeland Security, shall be deemed to refer, as appropriate, to the Department or its officers, employees, agents, organizational units, or functions.
Sec. 90. Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the authority of the Secretary of Defense with respect to the Department of Defense, including the chain of command for the armed forces of the United States under section 162(b) of title 10, United States Code, and the authority of the Secretary of Defense with respect to the Department of Defense under section 113(b) of that title.
Sec. 91. Nothing in this order shall be construed to limit or restrict the authorities of the Central Intelligence Agency and the Director of Central Intelligence pursuant to the National Security Act of 1947 and the CIA Act of 1949.
Sec. 92. This order shall become effective on March 1, 2003.
Sec. 93. This order does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, against the United States, its departments, agencies, or other entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13287 of March 3, 2003
Preserve America
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the National Historic Preservation Act (16 U.S.C. 470 et seq.) (NHPA) and the National Environmental Policy Act (42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.), it is hereby ordered:
Section 1.
Statement of Policy. It is the policy of the Federal Government to provide leadership in preserving America's heritage by actively advancing the protection, enhancement, and contemporary use of the historic properties owned by the Federal Government, and by promoting intergovernmental cooperation and partnerships for the preservation and use of historic properties. The Federal Government shall recognize and manage the historic properties in its ownership as assets that can support department and agency missions while contributing to the vitality and economic
well-being of the Nation's communities and fostering a broader appreciation for the development of the United States and its underlying values. Where consistent with executive branch department and agency missions, governing law, applicable preservation standards, and where appropriate, executive branch departments and agencies (“agency” or “agencies”) shall advance this policy through the protection and continued use of the historic properties owned by the Federal Government, and by pursuing partnerships with State and local governments, Indian tribes, and the private sector to promote the preservation of the unique cultural heritage of communities and of the Nation and to realize the economic benefit that these properties can provide. Agencies shall maximize efforts to integrate the policies, procedures, and practices of the NHPA and this order into their program activities in order to efficiently and effectively advance historic preservation objectives in the pursuit of their missions.
Sec. 2.
Building Preservation Partnerships. When carrying out its mission activities, each agency, where consistent with its mission and governing authorities, and where appropriate, shall seek partnerships with State and local governments, Indian tribes, and the private sector to promote local economic development and vitality through the use of historic properties in a manner that contributes to the long-term preservation and productive use of those properties. Each agency shall examine its policies, procedures, and capabilities to ensure that its actions encourage, support, and foster public-private initiatives and investment in the use, reuse, and rehabilitation of historic properties, to the extent such support is not inconsistent with other provisions of law, the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Archeology and Historic Preservation, and essential national department and agency mission requirements.
Sec. 3.
Improving Federal Agency Planning and Accountability. (a) Accurate information on the state of Federally owned historic properties is essential to achieving the goals of this order and to promoting community economic development through local partnerships. Each agency with real property management responsibilities shall prepare an assessment of the current status of its inventory of historic properties required by section 110(a)(2) of the NHPA (16 U.S.C. 470h-2(a)(2)), the general condition and management needs of such properties, and the steps underway or planned to meet those management needs. The assessment shall also include an evaluation of the suitability of the agency's types of historic properties to contribute to community economic development initiatives, including heritage tourism, taking into Start Printed Page 10636account agency mission needs, public access considerations, and the long-term preservation of the historic properties. No later than September 30, 2004, each covered agency shall complete a report of the assessment and make it available to the Chairman of the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Council) and the Secretary of the Interior (Secretary).
(b) No later than September 30, 2004, each agency with real property management responsibilities shall review its regulations, management policies, and operating procedures for compliance with sections 110 and 111 of the NHPA (16 U.S.C. 470h-2 & 470-3) and make the results of its review available to the Council and the Secretary. If the agency determines that its regulations, management policies, and operating procedures are not in compliance with those authorities, the agency shall make amendments or revisions to bring them into compliance.
(c) Each agency with real property management responsibilities shall, by September 30, 2005, and every third year thereafter, prepare a report on its progress in identifying, protecting, and using historic properties in its ownership and make the report available to the Council and the Secretary. The Council shall incorporate this data into a report on the state of the Federal Government's historic properties and their contribution to local economic development and submit this report to the President by February 15, 2006, and every third year thereafter.
(d) Agencies may use existing information gathering and reporting systems to fulfill the assessment and reporting requirements of subsections 3(a)-(c) of this order. To assist agencies, the Council, in consultation with the Secretary, shall, by September 30, 2003, prepare advisory guidelines for agencies to use at their discretion.
(e) No later than June 30, 2003, the head of each agency shall designate a senior policy level official to have policy oversight responsibility for the agency's historic preservation program and notify the Council and the Secretary of the designation. This senior official shall be an assistant secretary, deputy assistant secretary, or the equivalent, as appropriate to the agency organization. This official, or a subordinate employee reporting directly to the official, shall serve as the agency's Federal Preservation Officer in accordance with section 110(c) of the NHPA. The senior official shall ensure that the Federal Preservation Officer is qualified consistent with guidelines established by the Secretary for that position and has access to adequate expertise and support to carry out the duties of the position.
Sec. 4.
Improving Federal Stewardship of Historic Properties. (a) Each agency shall ensure that the management of historic properties in its ownership is conducted in a manner that promotes the long-term preservation and use of those properties as Federal assets and, where consistent with agency missions, governing law, and the nature of the properties, contributes to the local community and its economy.
(b) Where consistent with agency missions and the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Archeology and Historic Preservation, and where appropriate, agencies shall cooperate with communities to increase opportunities for public benefit from, and access to, Federally owned historic properties.
(c) The Council is directed to use its existing authority to encourage and accept donations of money, equipment, and other resources from public and private parties to assist other agencies in the preservation of historic properties in Federal ownership to fulfill the goals of the NHPA and this order.
(d) The National Park Service, working with the Council and in consultation with other agencies, shall make available existing materials and information for education, training, and awareness of historic property stewardship to ensure that all Federal personnel have access to information and can develop the skills necessary to continue the productive use of Federally owned historic properties while meeting their stewardship responsibilities.Start Printed Page 10637
(e) The Council, in consultation with the National Park Service and other agencies, shall encourage and recognize exceptional achievement by such agencies in meeting the goals of the NHPA and this order. By March 31, 2004, the Council shall submit to the President and the heads of agencies recommendations to further stimulate initiative, creativity, and efficiency in the Federal stewardship of historic properties.
Sec. 5.
Promoting Preservation Through Heritage Tourism.
(a) To the extent permitted by law and within existing resources, the Secretary of Commerce, working with the Council and other agencies, shall assist States, Indian tribes, and local communities in promoting the use of historic properties for heritage tourism and related economic development in a manner that contributes to the long-term preservation and productive use of those properties. Such assistance shall include efforts to strengthen and improve heritage tourism activities throughout the country as they relate to Federally owned historic properties and significant natural assets on Federal lands.
(b) Where consistent with agency missions and governing law, and where appropriate, agencies shall use historic properties in their ownership in conjunction with State, tribal, and local tourism programs to foster viable economic partnerships, including, but not limited to, cooperation and coordination with tourism officials and others with interests in the properties.
Sec. 6.
National and Homeland Security Considerations.
Nothing in this order shall be construed to require any agency to take any action or disclose any information that would conflict with or compromise national and homeland security goals, policies, programs, or activities.
Sec. 7.
Definitions. For the purposes of this order, the term “historic property” means any prehistoric or historic district, site, building, structure, and object included on or eligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places in accordance with section 301(5) of the NHPA (16 U.S.C. 470w(5)). The term “heritage tourism” means the business and practice of attracting and accommodating visitors to a place or area based especially on the unique or special aspects of that locale's history, landscape (including trail systems), and culture. The terms “Federally owned” and “in Federal ownership,” and similar terms, as used in this order, do not include properties acquired by agencies as a result of foreclosure or similar actions and that are held for a period of less than 5 years.
Sec. 8.
Judicial Review. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and it is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity by a party against the United States, its departments, Start Printed Page 10638agencies, instrumentalities or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13288 of March 6, 2003
Blocking Property of Persons Undermining Democratic
Processes or Institutions in Zimbabwe
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, have determined that the actions and policies of certain members of the Government of Zimbabwe and other persons to undermine Zimbabwe's democratic processes or institutions, contributing to the deliberate breakdown in the rule of law in Zimbabwe, to politically motivated violence and intimidation in that country, and to political and economic instability in the southern African region, constitute an unusual and extraordinary threat to the foreign policy of the United States, and I hereby declare a national emergency to deal with that threat.
I hereby order:
Section 1. Except to the extent provided in section 203(b) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)), and in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date of this order, all property and interests in property of the following persons that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of United States persons, including their overseas branches, are blocked and may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in:
(a) the persons listed in the Annex to this order; and
(b) any person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, to be owned or controlled by, or acting or purporting to act directly or indirectly for or on behalf of, any of the persons listed in the Annex to this order.
Sec. 2. (a) Any transaction or dealing by a United States person or within the United States in property or interests in property blocked pursuant to this order is prohibited, including but not limited to the making or receiving of any contribution of funds, goods, or services to or for the benefit of any person listed in the Annex to this order or who is the subject of a determination under subsection 1(b) of this order.
(b) Any transaction by a United States person or within the United States that evades or avoids, has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
(c) Any conspiracy formed to violate the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
Sec. 3. For the purposes of this order:
(a) The term “person” means an individual or entity;
(b) The term “entity” means a partnership, association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization; and
(c) The term “United States person” means any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United Start Printed Page 11458States or any jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States.
Sec. 4. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to me by IEEPA, as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government. All agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order.
Sec. 5. This order is not intended to create, nor does it create, any right, benefit, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by a party against the United States, its agencies, officers, employees, or any other person.
Sec. 6. (a) This order is effective at 12:01 eastern standard time on March 7, 2003; and
(b) This order shall be transmitted to the Congress and published in the Federal Register.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
March 6, 2003.
Start Printed Page 11459
ANNEX
1. Robert Gabriel MUGABE [President of Zimbabwe, born 21 Feb. 1924]
2. Flora BUKA [Minister of State for Land Reform, born 25 Feb. 1968]
3. George CHARAMBA [Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Information, born 4 Apr. 1963]
4. Fortune CHARUMBIRA [Deputy Minister for Local Government, Public Works, and National Housing, born 10 June 1962]
5. Aeneas CHIGWEDERE [Minister of Education, Sports and Culture, born 25 Nov. 1939]
6. Augustine CHIHURI [Police Commissioner, born 10 Mar. 1953]
7. Enos CHIKOWORE [Politburo Secretary for Land and Resettlement, born 17 July 1942]
8. Patrick CHINAMASA [Minister of Justice, born 25 Jan. 1947]
9. Edward CHINDORI-CHININGA [Minister of Mines, born 14 Mar. 1955]
10. Constantine CHIWENGA [Lt. Gen., Commander of the Army, born 25 Aug. 1956]
11. Willard CHIWEWE [Senior Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, born 19 Mar. 1949]
12. Ignatius CHOMBO [Minister of Local Government, born 1 Aug. 1952]
13. Dumiso DABENGWA [Politburo Senior Committee Member, born 6 Dec. 1939]
14. Nicholas GOCHE [Minister of State for National Security, born 1 Aug. 1946]
15. Rugare GUMBO [Deputy Minister for Home Affairs, born 8 Mar. 1940]
16. Richard HOVE [Politburo Secretary for Economic Affairs, born 23 Sept. 1939]
17. David KARIMANZIRA [Politburo Secretary for Finance, born 25 May 1947]
18. Saviour KASUKUWERE [Deputy-Secretary for Youth Affairs, born 23 Oct. 1970]
19. Christopher KURUNERI [Deputy Minister, Finance and Economic Development, born 4 Apr. 1949]
20. Thenjiwe LESABE [Politburo Secretary for Women's Affairs, born 5 Jan. 1933]
21. Jaison MACHAYA [Deputy Minister for Mines and Mining Development, born 13 June 1952]
22. Joseph MADE [Minister of Agriculture, born 21 Nov. 1954]
23. Edna MADZONGWE [Deputy-Secretary for Production and Labor, born 11 July 1943]
24. Shuvai MAHOFA [Deputy Minister for Youth Development, Gender and Employment Creation, born 4 Apr. 1941]
25. Joshua MALINGA [Deputy-Secretary for Disabled and Disadvantaged, born 28 Apr. 1944]
26. Paul MANGWANA [Minister of State for State Enterprises and Parastatals, born 10 Aug. 1961]
27. Witness MANGWENDE [Minister of Transport and Communications, born 15 Aug. 1946]
28. Elliot MANYIKA [Minister of Youth Development, born 30 July 1955]
29. Kenneth MANYONDA [Deputy Minister for Industry and International Trade, born 10 Aug. 1934] Start Printed Page 11460
30. Reuben MARUMAHOKO [Deputy Minister for Energy and Power Development, born 4 Apr. 1948]
31. Angeline MASUKU [Politburo Secretary for Disabled and Disadvantaged Person's Welfare, born 14 Oct. 1936]
32. Sithokozile MATHUTHU [Deputy-Secretary for Transport and Social Welfare]
33. Amos Bernard Muvenga MIDZI [Minister for Energy and Development, born 4 July 1952]
34. Emmerson MNANGAGWA [Parliamentary Speaker, born 15 Sept. 1946]
35. Kembo MOHADI [Minister of Home Affairs, born 15 Nov. 1949]
36. Swithun MOMBESHORA [Minister of Higher Education, born 20 Aug. 1945]
37. Jonathan MOYO [Minister of Information, born 12 Jan. 1957]
38. July MOYO [Minister of Public Service, Labor and Social Welfare, born 7 May 1950]
39. Simon Khaya MOYO [Deputy-Secretary for Legal Affairs, born 1945]
40. Obert MPOFU [Deputy-Secretary for National Security, born 12 Oct. 1951]
41. Joseph MSIKA [Vice President, born 6 Dec. 1923]
42. Olivia MUCHENA [Minister of State for Science and Technology Development, born 18 Aug. 1946]
43. Opah MUCHINGURI [Politburo Secretary for Gender and Culture, born 14 Dec. 1958]
44. Stan MUDENGE [Minister of Foreign Affairs, born 17 Dec. 1948]
45. Grace MUGABE [born 23 July 1965]
46. Sabina MUGABE [Politburo Senior Committee Member, born 14 Oct. 1934]
47. Joyce MUJURU [Minister of Rural Resources and Water, born 15 Apr. 1955]
48. Solomon MUJURU [Politburo Senior Committee Member, born 1 May 1949]
49. Samuel MUMBENGEGWI [Minister of Industry and International Trade, born 20 July 1945]
50. Herbert MURERWA [Minister of Finance, born 31 July 1941]
51. Christopher MUSHOHWE [Deputy Minister, Transport and Communications, born 6 Feb. 1954]
52. Didymus MUTASA [Politburo Secretary for External Relations, born 27 July 1935]
53. Kenneth MUTIWEKUZIVA [Deputy Minister for Small and Medium Enterprise Development, born 27 May 1948]
54. Simon Vengesai MUZENDA [Vice President, born 28 Oct. 1922]
55. Tsitsi MUZENDA [Politburo Senior Committee Member, born 28 Aug. 1922]
56. Elisha MUZONZINI [Director of the Central Intelligence Organization, born 24 June 1957]
57. Abedinico NCUBE [Deputy Minister, Foreign Affairs, born 13 March 1954]
58. Naison NDLOVU [Politburo Secretary for Production and Labor, born 22 Oct. 1930]
59. Sikhanyiso NDLOVU [Deputy-Secretary for Commissariat, born 20 Sept. 1949] Start Printed Page 11461
60. Francis NHEMA [Minister of Environment and Tourism, born 17 Apr. 1959]
61. John NKOMO [Minister of State for Special Affairs, born 22 Aug. 1934]
62. Stephen NKOMO [Politburo Senior Committee Member, born 3 Oct. 1926]
63. Sithembiso NYONI [Minister of Small and Medium Enterprises Development, born 20 Sept. 1949]
64. David PARIRENYATWA [Minister of Health and Child Welfare, born 2 Aug. 1950]
65. Selina POTE [Deputy-Secretary for Gender and Culture]
66. Tinos RUSERE [Deputy Minister for Rural Resources and Water Development, born 10 May 1945]
67. Stanley SAKUPWANYA [Deputy-Secretary for Health and Child Welfare]
68. Sidney SEKERAMAYI [Minister of Defense, born 30 Mar. 1944]
69. Nathan SHAMUYARIRA [Politburo Secretary for Information and Publicity, born 29 Sept. 1928]
70. Perence SHIRI [Air Marshal (Air Force), born 11 Jan. 1955]
71. Isaiah SHUMBA [Deputy Minister, Education, Sports and Culture, born 3 Jan. 1949]
72. Absolom SIKOSANA [Politburo Secretary for Youth Affairs]
73. Solomon TAWENGWA [Deputy-Secretary for Finance, born 15 June 1940]
74. Josiah TUNGAMIRAI [Politburo Secretary for Empowerment and Indigenization, born 8 Oct. 1948]
75. Charles UTETE [Cabinet Secretary, born 30 Oct. 1938]
76. Paradzai ZIMONDI [Prisons chief, born 4 Mar. 1947]
77. Vitalis ZVINAVASHE [General, Commander of Zimbabwe Defense Forces, born 27 Sept. 1943]
Note: The bracketed identifying information with respect to each person listed in this Annex reflects information currently available and is provided solely to facilitate compliance with this order. Each individual listed in this Annex remains subject to the prohibitions of this order notwithstanding any change in title, position, or affiliation.
Executive Order 13289 of March 12, 2003
Establishing the Global War on Terrorism Medals
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including my authority as Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces of the United States, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal. There is hereby established the Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal with suitable appurtenances. Except as limited in section 3 of this order, and under uniform regulations to be prescribed by the Secretaries of the military departments and approved by the Secretary of Defense, or under regulations to be prescribed by the Secretary of Homeland Security with respect to the Coast Guard when it is not operating as a service in the Navy, the Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal shall be awarded to members of the Armed Forces of the United States who serve or have served in military expeditions to combat terrorism, as defined by such regulations, on or after September 11, 2001, and before a terminal date to be prescribed by the Secretary of Defense.
Sec. 2. Global War on Terrorism Service Medal. There is hereby established the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal with suitable appurtenances. Except as limited in section 3 of this order, and under uniform regulations to be prescribed by the Secretaries of the military departments and approved by the Secretary of Defense, or under regulations to be prescribed by the Secretary of Homeland Security with respect to the Coast Guard when it is not operating as a service in the Navy, the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal shall be awarded to members of the Armed Forces of the United States who serve or have served in military operations to combat terrorism, as defined by such regulations, on or after September 11, 2001, and before a terminal date to be prescribed by the Secretary of Defense.
Sec. 3. Relationship to Other Awards. Notwithstanding section 3 of Executive Order 10977 of December 4, 1961, establishing the Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal and section 3 of Executive Order 12985 of January 11, 1996, establishing the Armed Forces Service Medal, any member who qualified for those medals by reason of service in operations to combat terrorism between September 11, 2001, and a terminal date to be determined by the Secretary of Defense, shall remain qualified for those medals. Upon application, any such member may be awarded either the Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal or the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal in lieu of the Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal or the Armed Forces Service Medal, but no person may be awarded more than one of these four medals by reason of service in the same approved Global War on Terrorism expedition or operation to combat terrorism, and no person shall be entitled to more than one award of the Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal or the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal.
Sec. 4. Posthumous Award. The Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal and the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal may be awarded posthumously to any person covered by and under regulations prescribed in accordance with the first or second sections of this order.Start Printed Page 12568
Sec. 5. Nothing in this Executive Order shall be construed for any purpose as fixing, or authorizing the fixing of, the dates of initiation or termination of armed hostilities between the United States and terrorists of global reach.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13290 of March 20, 2003
Confiscating and Vesting Certain Iraqi Property
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and in order to take additional steps with respect to the national emergency declared in Executive Order 12722 of August 2, 1990,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, hereby determine that the United States and Iraq are engaged in armed hostilities, that it is in the interest of the United States to confiscate certain property of the Government of Iraq and its agencies, instrumentalities, or controlled entities, and that all right, title, and interest in any property so confiscated should vest in the Department of the Treasury. I intend that such vested property should be used to assist the Iraqi people and to assist in the reconstruction of Iraq, and determine that such use would be in the interest of and for the benefit of the United States.
I hereby order:
Section 1. All blocked funds held in the United States in accounts in the name of the Government of Iraq, the Central Bank of Iraq, Rafidain Bank, Rasheed Bank, or the State Organization for Marketing Oil are hereby confiscated and vested in the Department of the Treasury, except for the following:
(a) any such funds that are subject to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations or the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations, or that enjoy equivalent privileges and immunities under the laws of the United States, and are or have been used for diplomatic or consular purposes, and
(b) any such amounts that as of the date of this order are subject to post-judgment writs of execution or attachment in aid of execution of judgments pursuant to section 201 of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 (Public Law 107 297), provided that, upon satisfaction of the judgments on which such writs are based, any remainder of such excepted amounts shall, by virtue of this order and without further action, be confiscated and vested.
Sec. 2. The Secretary of the Treasury is authorized to perform, without further approval, ratification, or other action of the President, all functions of the President set forth in section 203(a)(1)(C) of IEEPA with respect to any and all property of the Government of Iraq, including its agencies, instrumentalities, or controlled entities, and to take additional steps, including the promulgation of rules and regulations as may be necessary, to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate such functions in accordance with applicable law. The Secretary of the Treasury shall consult the Attorney General as appropriate in the implementation of this order.Start Printed Page 14308
Sec. 3. This order shall be transmitted to the Congress and published in the Federal Register.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13291 of March 21, 2003
Further Adjustment of Certain Rates of Pay
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered that Executive Order 13282 of December 31, 2002, is amended as follows:
Section 1. Section 3(c) of Executive Order 13282 is amended to read as follows:
“(c) Justices and judges (28 U.S.C. 5, 44(d), 135, 252, and 461(a), section 140 of Public Law 97-92, and Public Law 108-6) at Schedule 7.”.
Sec. 2. Section 5(a) of Executive Order 13282 is amended to read as follows:
“(a) Pursuant to section 5304 of title 5, United States Code, and in accordance with section 637 of Division J of Public Law 108-7, locality-based comparability payments shall be paid in accordance with Schedule 9 attached hereto and made a part hereof.”.
Sec. 3. Executive Order 13282 is amended by striking Schedules 7 and 9 attached thereto and inserting Schedules 7 and 9 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 4. The amendments made by this order are effective on the first day of the first applicable pay period beginning on or after January 1, 2003.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
March 21, 2003.
Start Printed Page 14526
Executive Order 13292 of March 25, 2003
Further Amendment to Executive Order 12958, as Amended, Classified National Security Information
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to further amend Executive Order 12958, as amended, it is hereby ordered that Executive Order 12958 is amended to read as follows:
“Classified National Security Information
This order prescribes a uniform system for classifying, safeguarding, and declassifying national security information, including information relating to defense against transnational terrorism. Our democratic principles require that the American people be informed of the activities of their Government. Also, our Nation's progress depends on the free flow of information. Nevertheless, throughout our history, the national defense has required that certain information be maintained in confidence in order to protect our citizens, our democratic institutions, our homeland security, and our interactions with foreign nations. Protecting information critical to our Nation's security remains a priority.
NOW, THEREFORE, by the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
PART 1—ORIGINAL CLASSIFICATION
Sec. 1.1.
Classification Standards. (a) Information may be originally classified under the terms of this order only if all of the following conditions are met:
(1) an original classification authority is classifying the information;
(2) the information is owned by, produced by or for, or is under the control of the United States Government;
(3) the information falls within one or more of the categories of information listed in section 1.4 of this order; and
(4) the original classification authority determines that the unauthorized disclosure of the information reasonably could be expected to result in damage to the national security, which includes defense against transnational terrorism, and the original classification authority is able to identify or describe the damage.
(b) Classified information shall not be declassified automatically as a result of any unauthorized disclosure of identical or similar information.
(c) The unauthorized disclosure of foreign government information is presumed to cause damage to the national security.
Sec. 1.2.
Classification Levels. (a) Information may be classified at one of the following three levels:
(1) “Top Secret” shall be applied to information, the unauthorized disclosure of which reasonably could be expected to cause exceptionally grave damage to the national security that the original classification authority is able to identify or describe.
(2) “Secret” shall be applied to information, the unauthorized disclosure of which reasonably could be expected to cause serious damage to the Start Printed Page 15316national security that the original classification authority is able to identify or describe.
(3) “Confidential” shall be applied to information, the unauthorized disclosure of which reasonably could be expected to cause damage to the national security that the original classification authority is able to identify or describe.
(b) Except as otherwise provided by statute, no other terms shall be used to identify United States classified information.
Sec. 1.3.
Classification Authority. (a) The authority to classify information originally may be exercised only by:
(1) the President and, in the performance of executive duties, the Vice President;
(2) agency heads and officials designated by the President in the Federal Register; and
(3) United States Government officials delegated this authority pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section.
(b) Officials authorized to classify information at a specified level are also authorized to classify information at a lower level.
(c) Delegation of original classification authority.
(1) Delegations of original classification authority shall be limited to the minimum required to administer this order. Agency heads are responsible for ensuring that designated subordinate officials have a demonstrable and continuing need to exercise this authority.
(2) “Top Secret” original classification authority may be delegated only by the President; in the performance of executive duties, the Vice President; or an agency head or official designated pursuant to paragraph (a)(2) of this section.
(3) “Secret” or “Confidential” original classification authority may be delegated only by the President; in the performance of executive duties, the Vice President; or an agency head or official designated pursuant to paragraph (a)(2) of this section; or the senior agency official described in section 5.4(d) of this order, provided that official has been delegated “Top Secret” original classification authority by the agency head.
(4) Each delegation of original classification authority shall be in writing and the authority shall not be redelegated except as provided in this order. Each delegation shall identify the official by name or position title.
(d) Original classification authorities must receive training in original classification as provided in this order and its implementing directives. Such training must include instruction on the proper safeguarding of classified information and of the criminal, civil, and administrative sanctions that may be brought against an individual who fails to protect classified information from unauthorized disclosure.
(e) Exceptional cases. When an employee, government contractor, licensee, certificate holder, or grantee of an agency who does not have original classification authority originates information believed by that person to require classification, the information shall be protected in a manner consistent with this order and its implementing directives. The information shall be transmitted promptly as provided under this order or its implementing directives to the agency that has appropriate subject matter interest and classification authority with respect to this information. That agency shall decide within 30 days whether to classify this information. If it is not clear which agency has classification responsibility for this information, it shall be sent to the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office. The Director shall determine the agency having primary subject matter interest and forward the information, with appropriate recommendations, to that agency for a classification determination.Start Printed Page 15317
Sec. 1.4.
Classification Categories. Information shall not be considered for classification unless it concerns:
(a) military plans, weapons systems, or operations;
(b) foreign government information;
(c) intelligence activities (including special activities), intelligence sources or methods, or cryptology;
(d) foreign relations or foreign activities of the United States, including confidential sources;
(e) scientific, technological, or economic matters relating to the national security, which includes defense against transnational terrorism;
(f) United States Government programs for safeguarding nuclear materials or facilities;
(g) vulnerabilities or capabilities of systems, installations, infrastructures, projects, plans, or protection services relating to the national security, which includes defense against transnational terrorism; or
(h) weapons of mass destruction.
Sec. 1.5.
Duration of Classification. (a) At the time of original classification, the original classification authority shall attempt to establish a specific date or event for declassification based upon the duration of the national security sensitivity of the information. Upon reaching the date or event, the information shall be automatically declassified. The date or event shall not exceed the time frame established in paragraph (b) of this section.
(b) If the original classification authority cannot determine an earlier specific date or event for declassification, information shall be marked for declassification 10 years from the date of the original decision, unless the original classification authority otherwise determines that the sensitivity of the information requires that it shall be marked for declassification for up to 25 years from the date of the original decision. All information classified under this section shall be subject to section 3.3 of this order if it is contained in records of permanent historical value under title 44, United States Code.
(c) An original classification authority may extend the duration of classification, change the level of classification, or reclassify specific information only when the standards and procedures for classifying information under this order are followed.
(d) Information marked for an indefinite duration of classification under predecessor orders, for example, marked as “Originating Agency's Determination Required,” or information classified under predecessor orders that contains no declassification instructions shall be declassified in accordance with part 3 of this order.
Sec. 1.6.
Identification and Markings. (a) At the time of original classification, the following shall appear on the face of each classified document, or shall be applied to other classified media in an appropriate manner:
(1) one of the three classification levels defined in section 1.2 of this order;
(2) the identity, by name or personal identifier and position, of the original classification authority;
(3) the agency and office of origin, if not otherwise evident;
(4) declassification instructions, which shall indicate one of the following:
(A)
the date or event for declassification, as prescribed in section 1.5(a) or section 1.5(c);
(B)
the date that is 10 years from the date of original classification, as prescribed in section 1.5(b); or
(C)
the date that is up to 25 years from the date of original classification, as prescribed in section 1.5 (b); and
(5) a concise reason for classification that, at a minimum, cites the applicable classification categories in section 1.4 of this order.Start Printed Page 15318
(b) Specific information described in paragraph (a) of this section may be excluded if it would reveal additional classified information.
(c) With respect to each classified document, the agency originating the document shall, by marking or other means, indicate which portions are classified, with the applicable classification level, and which portions are unclassified. In accordance with standards prescribed in directives issued under this order, the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office may grant waivers of this requirement. The Director shall revoke any waiver upon a finding of abuse.
(d) Markings implementing the provisions of this order, including abbreviations and requirements to safeguard classified working papers, shall conform to the standards prescribed in implementing directives issued pursuant to this order.
(e) Foreign government information shall retain its original classification markings or shall be assigned a U.S. classification that provides a degree of protection at least equivalent to that required by the entity that furnished the information. Foreign government information retaining its original classification markings need not be assigned a U.S. classification marking provided that the responsible agency determines that the foreign government markings are adequate to meet the purposes served by U.S. classification markings.
(f) Information assigned a level of classification under this or predecessor orders shall be considered as classified at that level of classification despite the omission of other required markings. Whenever such information is used in the derivative classification process or is reviewed for possible declassification, holders of such information shall coordinate with an appropriate classification authority for the application of omitted markings.
(g) The classification authority shall, whenever practicable, use a classified addendum whenever classified information constitutes a small portion of an otherwise unclassified document.
(h) Prior to public release, all declassified records shall be appropriately marked to reflect their declassification.
Sec. 1.7.
Classification Prohibitions and Limitations.
(a) In no case shall information be classified in order to:
(1) conceal violations of law, inefficiency, or administrative error;
(2) prevent embarrassment to a person, organization, or agency;
(3) restrain competition; or
(4) prevent or delay the release of information that does not require protection in the interest of the national security.
(b) Basic scientific research information not clearly related to the national security shall not be classified.
(c) Information may be reclassified after declassification and release to the public under proper authority only in accordance with the following conditions:
(1) the reclassification action is taken under the personal authority of the agency head or deputy agency head, who determines in writing that the reclassification of the information is necessary in the interest of the national security;
(2) the information may be reasonably recovered; and
(3) the reclassification action is reported promptly to the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office.
(d) Information that has not previously been disclosed to the public under proper authority may be classified or reclassified after an agency has received a request for it under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552) or the Privacy Act of 1974 (5 U.S.C. 552a), or the mandatory review provisions of section 3.5 of this order only if such classification meets the requirements of this order and is accomplished on a document-by-document basis with Start Printed Page 15319the personal participation or under the direction of the agency head, the deputy agency head, or the senior agency official designated under section 5.4 of this order.
(e) Compilations of items of information that are individually unclassified may be classified if the compiled information reveals an additional association or relationship that: (1) meets the standards for classification under this order; and (2) is not otherwise revealed in the individual items of information. As used in this order, “compilation” means an aggregation of pre-existing unclassified items of information.
Sec. 1.8.
Classification Challenges. (a) Authorized holders of information who, in good faith, believe that its classification status is improper are encouraged and expected to challenge the classification status of the information in accordance with agency procedures established under paragraph (b) of this section.
(b) In accordance with implementing directives issued pursuant to this order, an agency head or senior agency official shall establish procedures under which authorized holders of information are encouraged and expected to challenge the classification of information that they believe is improperly classified or unclassified. These procedures shall ensure that:
(1) individuals are not subject to retribution for bringing such actions;
(2) an opportunity is provided for review by an impartial official or panel; and
(3) individuals are advised of their right to appeal agency decisions to the Interagency Security Classification Appeals Panel (Panel) established by section 5.3 of this order.
PART 2—DERIVATIVE CLASSIFICATION
Sec. 2.1.
Use of Derivative Classification. (a) Persons who only reproduce, extract, or summarize classified information, or who only apply classification markings derived from source material or as directed by a classification guide, need not possess original classification authority.
(b) Persons who apply derivative classification markings shall:
(1) observe and respect original classification decisions; and
(2) carry forward to any newly created documents the pertinent classification markings. For information derivatively classified based on multiple sources, the derivative classifier shall carry forward:
(A)
the date or event for declassification that corresponds to the longest period of classification among the sources; and
(B)
a listing of these sources on or attached to the official file or record copy.
Sec. 2.2.
Classification Guides. (a) Agencies with original classification authority shall prepare classification guides to facilitate the proper and uniform derivative classification of information. These guides shall conform to standards contained in directives issued under this order.
(b) Each guide shall be approved personally and in writing by an official who:
(1) has program or supervisory responsibility over the information or is the senior agency official; and
(2) is authorized to classify information originally at the highest level of classification prescribed in the guide.
(c) Agencies shall establish procedures to ensure that classification guides are reviewed and updated as provided in directives issued under this order.
PART 3—DECLASSIFICATION AND DOWNGRADING
Sec. 3.1.
Authority for Declassification. (a) Information shall be declassified as soon as it no longer meets the standards for classification under this order.Start Printed Page 15320
(b) It is presumed that information that continues to meet the classification requirements under this order requires continued protection. In some exceptional cases, however, the need to protect such information may be outweighed by the public interest in disclosure of the information, and in these cases the information should be declassified. When such questions arise, they shall be referred to the agency head or the senior agency official. That official will determine, as an exercise of discretion, whether the public interest in disclosure outweighs the damage to the national security that might reasonably be expected from disclosure. This provision does not:
(1) amplify or modify the substantive criteria or procedures for classification; or
(2) create any substantive or procedural rights subject to judicial review.
(c) If the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office determines that information is classified in violation of this order, the Director may require the information to be declassified by the agency that originated the classification. Any such decision by the Director may be appealed to the President through the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs. The information shall remain classified pending a prompt decision on the appeal.
(d) The provisions of this section shall also apply to agencies that, under the terms of this order, do not have original classification authority, but had such authority under predecessor orders.
Sec. 3.2.
Transferred Records. (a) In the case of classified records transferred in conjunction with a transfer of functions, and not merely for storage purposes, the receiving agency shall be deemed to be the originating agency for purposes of this order.
(b) In the case of classified records that are not officially transferred as described in paragraph (a) of this section, but that originated in an agency that has ceased to exist and for which there is no successor agency, each agency in possession of such records shall be deemed to be the originating agency for purposes of this order. Such records may be declassified or downgraded by the agency in possession after consultation with any other agency that has an interest in the subject matter of the records.
(c) Classified records accessioned into the National Archives and Records Administration (National Archives) as of the effective date of this order shall be declassified or downgraded by the Archivist of the United States (Archivist) in accordance with this order, the directives issued pursuant to this order, agency declassification guides, and any existing procedural agreement between the Archivist and the relevant agency head.
(d) The originating agency shall take all reasonable steps to declassify classified information contained in records determined to have permanent historical value before they are accessioned into the National Archives. However, the Archivist may require that classified records be accessioned into the National Archives when necessary to comply with the provisions of the Federal Records Act. This provision does not apply to records being transferred to the Archivist pursuant to section 2203 of title 44, United States Code, or records for which the National Archives serves as the custodian of the records of an agency or organization that has gone out of existence.
(e) To the extent practicable, agencies shall adopt a system of records management that will facilitate the public release of documents at the time such documents are declassified pursuant to the provisions for automatic declassification in section 3.3 of this order.
Sec. 3.3.
Automatic Declassification. (a) Subject to paragraphs (b)-(e) of this section, on December 31, 2006, all classified records that (1) are more than 25 years old and (2) have been determined to have permanent historical value under title 44, United States Code, shall be automatically declassified whether or not the records have been reviewed. Subsequently, all classified records shall be automatically declassified on December 31 of the year Start Printed Page 15321that is 25 years from the date of its original classification, except as provided in paragraphs (b)-(e) of this section.
(b) An agency head may exempt from automatic declassification under paragraph (a) of this section specific information, the release of which could be expected to:
(1) reveal the identity of a confidential human source, or a human intelligence source, or reveal information about the application of an intelligence source or method;
(2) reveal information that would assist in the development or use of weapons of mass destruction;
(3) reveal information that would impair U.S. cryptologic systems or activities;
(4) reveal information that would impair the application of state of the art technology within a U.S. weapon system;
(5) reveal actual U.S. military war plans that remain in effect;
(6) reveal information, including foreign government information, that would seriously and demonstrably impair relations between the United States and a foreign government, or seriously and demonstrably undermine ongoing diplomatic activities of the United States;
(7) reveal information that would clearly and demonstrably impair the current ability of United States Government officials to protect the President, Vice President, and other protectees for whom protection services, in the interest of the national security, are authorized;
(8) reveal information that would seriously and demonstrably impair current national security emergency preparedness plans or reveal current vulnerabilities of systems, installations, infrastructures, or projects relating to the national security; or
(9) violate a statute, treaty, or international agreement.
(c) An agency head shall notify the President through the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs of any specific file series of records for which a review or assessment has determined that the information within that file series almost invariably falls within one or more of the exemption categories listed in paragraph (b) of this section and which the agency proposes to exempt from automatic declassification. The notification shall include:
(1) a description of the file series;
(2) an explanation of why the information within the file series is almost invariably exempt from automatic declassification and why the information must remain classified for a longer period of time; and
(3) except for the identity of a confidential human source or a human intelligence source, as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, a specific date or event for declassification of the information. The President may direct the agency head not to exempt the file series or to declassify the information within that series at an earlier date than recommended. File series exemptions previously approved by the President shall remain valid without any additional agency action.
(d) At least 180 days before information is automatically declassified under this section, an agency head or senior agency official shall notify the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office, serving as Executive Secretary of the Panel, of any specific information beyond that included in a notification to the President under paragraph (c) of this section that the agency proposes to exempt from automatic declassification. The notification shall include:
(1) a description of the information, either by reference to information in specific records or in the form of a declassification guide;Start Printed Page 15322
(2) an explanation of why the information is exempt from automatic declassification and must remain classified for a longer period of time; and
(3) except for the identity of a confidential human source or a human intelligence source, as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, a specific date or event for declassification of the information. The Panel may direct the agency not to exempt the information or to declassify it at an earlier date than recommended. The agency head may appeal such a decision to the President through the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs. The information will remain classified while such an appeal is pending.
(e) The following provisions shall apply to the onset of automatic declassification:
(1) Classified records within an integral file block, as defined in this order, that are otherwise subject to automatic declassification under this section shall not be automatically declassified until December 31 of the year that is 25 years from the date of the most recent record within the file block.
(2) By notification to the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office, before the records are subject to automatic declassification, an agency head or senior agency official designated under section 5.4 of this order may delay automatic declassification for up to 5 additional years for classified information contained in microforms, motion pictures, audiotapes, videotapes, or comparable media that make a review for possible declassification exemptions more difficult or costly.
(3) By notification to the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office, before the records are subject to automatic declassification, an agency head or senior agency official designated under section 5.4 of this order may delay automatic declassification for up to 3 years for classified records that have been referred or transferred to that agency by another agency less than 3 years before automatic declassification would otherwise be required.
(4) By notification to the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office, an agency head or senior agency official designated under section 5.4 of this order may delay automatic declassification for up to 3 years from the date of discovery of classified records that were inadvertently not reviewed prior to the effective date of automatic declassification.
(f) Information exempted from automatic declassification under this section shall remain subject to the mandatory and systematic declassification review provisions of this order.
(g) The Secretary of State shall determine when the United States should commence negotiations with the appropriate officials of a foreign government or international organization of governments to modify any treaty or international agreement that requires the classification of information contained in records affected by this section for a period longer than 25 years from the date of its creation, unless the treaty or international agreement pertains to information that may otherwise remain classified beyond 25 years under this section.
(h) Records containing information that originated with other agencies or the disclosure of which would affect the interests or activities of other agencies shall be referred for review to those agencies and the information of concern shall be subject to automatic declassification only by those agencies, consistent with the provisions of subparagraphs (e)(3) and (e)(4) of this section.
Sec. 3.4.
Systematic Declassification Review. (a) Each agency that has originated classified information under this order or its predecessors shall establish and conduct a program for systematic declassification review. This program shall apply to records of permanent historical value exempted from automatic declassification under section 3.3 of this order. Agencies Start Printed Page 15323shall prioritize the systematic review of records based upon the degree of researcher interest and the likelihood of declassification upon review.
(b) The Archivist shall conduct a systematic declassification review program for classified records: (1) accessioned into the National Archives as of the effective date of this order; (2) transferred to the Archivist pursuant to section 2203 of title 44, United States Code; and (3) for which the National Archives serves as the custodian for an agency or organization that has gone out of existence. This program shall apply to pertinent records no later than 25 years from the date of their creation. The Archivist shall establish priorities for the systematic review of these records based upon the degree of researcher interest and the likelihood of declassification upon review. These records shall be reviewed in accordance with the standards of this order, its implementing directives, and declassification guides provided to the Archivist by each agency that originated the records. The Director of the Information Security Oversight Office shall ensure that agencies provide the Archivist with adequate and current declassification guides.
(c) After consultation with affected agencies, the Secretary of Defense may establish special procedures for systematic review for declassification of classified cryptologic information, and the Director of Central Intelligence may establish special procedures for systematic review for declassification of classified information pertaining to intelligence activities (including special activities), or intelligence sources or methods.
Sec. 3.5.
Mandatory Declassification Review. (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, all information classified under this order or predecessor orders shall be subject to a review for declassification by the originating agency if:
(1) the request for a review describes the document or material containing the information with sufficient specificity to enable the agency to locate it with a reasonable amount of effort;
(2) the information is not exempted from search and review under sections 105C, 105D, or 701 of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 403-5c, 403-5e, and 431); and
(3) the information has not been reviewed for declassification within the past 2 years. If the agency has reviewed the information within the past 2 years, or the information is the subject of pending litigation, the agency shall inform the requester of this fact and of the requester's appeal rights.
(b) Information originated by:
(1) the incumbent President or, in the performance of executive duties, the incumbent Vice President;
(2) the incumbent President's White House Staff or, in the performance of executive duties, the incumbent Vice President's Staff;
(3) committees, commissions, or boards appointed by the incumbent President; or
(4) other entities within the Executive Office of the President that solely advise and assist the incumbent President is exempted from the provisions of paragraph (a) of this section. However, the Archivist shall have the authority to review, downgrade, and declassify papers or records of former Presidents under the control of the Archivist pursuant to sections 2107, 2111, 2111 note, or 2203 of title 44, United States Code. Review procedures developed by the Archivist shall provide for consultation with agencies having primary subject matter interest and shall be consistent with the provisions of applicable laws or lawful agreements that pertain to the respective Presidential papers or records. Agencies with primary subject matter interest shall be notified promptly of the Archivist's decision. Any final decision by the Archivist may be appealed by the requester or an agency to the Panel. The information shall remain classified pending a prompt decision on the appeal.
(c) Agencies conducting a mandatory review for declassification shall declassify information that no longer meets the standards for classification Start Printed Page 15324under this order. They shall release this information unless withholding is otherwise authorized and warranted under applicable law.
(d) In accordance with directives issued pursuant to this order, agency heads shall develop procedures to process requests for the mandatory review of classified information. These procedures shall apply to information classified under this or predecessor orders. They also shall provide a means for administratively appealing a denial of a mandatory review request, and for notifying the requester of the right to appeal a final agency decision to the Panel.
(e) After consultation with affected agencies, the Secretary of Defense shall develop special procedures for the review of cryptologic information; the Director of Central Intelligence shall develop special procedures for the review of information pertaining to intelligence activities (including special activities), or intelligence sources or methods; and the Archivist shall develop special procedures for the review of information accessioned into the National Archives.
Sec. 3.6.
Processing Requests and Reviews. In response to a request for information under the Freedom of Information Act, the Privacy Act of 1974, or the mandatory review provisions of this order, or pursuant to the automatic declassification or systematic review provisions of this order:
(a) An agency may refuse to confirm or deny the existence or nonexistence of requested records whenever the fact of their existence or nonexistence is itself classified under this order or its predecessors.
(b) When an agency receives any request for documents in its custody that contain information that was originally classified by another agency, or comes across such documents in the process of the automatic declassification or systematic review provisions of this order, it shall refer copies of any request and the pertinent documents to the originating agency for processing, and may, after consultation with the originating agency, inform any requester of the referral unless such association is itself classified under this order or its predecessors. In cases in which the originating agency determines in writing that a response under paragraph (a) of this section is required, the referring agency shall respond to the requester in accordance with that paragraph.
Sec. 3.7.
Declassification Database. (a) The Director of the Information Security Oversight Office, in conjunction with those agencies that originate classified information, shall coordinate the linkage and effective utilization of existing agency databases of records that have been declassified and publicly released.
(b) Agency heads shall fully cooperate with the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office in these efforts.
PART 4—SAFEGUARDING
Sec. 4.1.
General Restrictions on Access. (a) A person may have access to classified information provided that:
(1) a favorable determination of eligibility for access has been made by an agency head or the agency head's designee;
(2) the person has signed an approved nondisclosure agreement; and
(3) the person has a need-to-know the information.
(b) Every person who has met the standards for access to classified information in paragraph (a) of this section shall receive contemporaneous training on the proper safeguarding of classified information and on the criminal, civil, and administrative sanctions that may be imposed on an individual who fails to protect classified information from unauthorized disclosure.
(c) Classified information shall remain under the control of the originating agency or its successor in function. An agency shall not disclose information originally classified by another agency without its authorization. An official or employee leaving agency service may not remove classified information from the agency's control.Start Printed Page 15325
(d) Classified information may not be removed from official premises without proper authorization.
(e) Persons authorized to disseminate classified information outside the executive branch shall ensure the protection of the information in a manner equivalent to that provided within the executive branch.
(f) Consistent with law, directives, and regulation, an agency head or senior agency official shall establish uniform procedures to ensure that automated information systems, including networks and telecommunications systems, that collect, create, communicate, compute, disseminate, process, or store classified information have controls that:
(1) prevent access by unauthorized persons; and
(2) ensure the integrity of the information.
(g) Consistent with law, directives, and regulation, each agency head or senior agency official shall establish controls to ensure that classified information is used, processed, stored, reproduced, transmitted, and destroyed under conditions that provide adequate protection and prevent access by unauthorized persons.
(h) Consistent with directives issued pursuant to this order, an agency shall safeguard foreign government information under standards that provide a degree of protection at least equivalent to that required by the government or international organization of governments that furnished the information. When adequate to achieve equivalency, these standards may be less restrictive than the safeguarding standards that ordinarily apply to United States “Confidential” information, including modified handling and transmission and allowing access to individuals with a need-to-know who have not otherwise been cleared for access to classified information or executed an approved nondisclosure agreement.
(i) Except as otherwise provided by statute, this order, directives implementing this order, or by direction of the President, classified information originating in one agency shall not be disseminated outside any other agency to which it has been made available without the consent of the originating agency. An agency head or senior agency official may waive this requirement for specific information originated within that agency. For purposes of this section, the Department of Defense shall be considered one agency. Prior consent is not required when referring records for declassification review that contain information originating in several agencies.
Sec. 4.2.
Distribution Controls. (a) Each agency shall establish controls over the distribution of classified information to ensure that it is distributed only to organizations or individuals eligible for access and with a need-to-know the information.
(b) In an emergency, when necessary to respond to an imminent threat to life or in defense of the homeland, the agency head or any designee may authorize the disclosure of classified information to an individual or individuals who are otherwise not eligible for access. Such actions shall be taken only in accordance with the directives implementing this order and any procedures issued by agencies governing the classified information, which shall be designed to minimize the classified information that is disclosed under these circumstances and the number of individuals who receive it. Information disclosed under this provision or implementing directives and procedures shall not be deemed declassified as a result of such disclosure or subsequent use by a recipient. Such disclosures shall be reported promptly to the originator of the classified information. For purposes of this section, the Director of Central Intelligence may issue an implementing directive governing the emergency disclosure of classified intelligence information.
(c) Each agency shall update, at least annually, the automatic, routine, or recurring distribution of classified information that they distribute. Recipients shall cooperate fully with distributors who are updating distribution lists and shall notify distributors whenever a relevant change in status occurs.Start Printed Page 15326
Sec. 4.3.
Special Access Programs. (a) Establishment of special access programs. Unless otherwise authorized by the President, only the Secretaries of State, Defense, and Energy, and the Director of Central Intelligence, or the principal deputy of each, may create a special access program. For special access programs pertaining to intelligence activities (including special activities, but not including military operational, strategic, and tactical programs), or intelligence sources or methods, this function shall be exercised by the Director of Central Intelligence. These officials shall keep the number of these programs at an absolute minimum, and shall establish them only when the program is required by statute or upon a specific finding that:
(1) the vulnerability of, or threat to, specific information is exceptional; and
(2) the normal criteria for determining eligibility for access applicable to information classified at the same level are not deemed sufficient to protect the information from unauthorized disclosure.
(b) Requirements and limitations. (1) Special access programs shall be limited to programs in which the number of persons who will have access ordinarily will be reasonably small and commensurate with the objective of providing enhanced protection for the information involved.
(2) Each agency head shall establish and maintain a system of accounting for special access programs consistent with directives issued pursuant to this order.
(3) Special access programs shall be subject to the oversight program established under section 5.4(d) of this order. In addition, the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office shall be afforded access to these programs, in accordance with the security requirements of each program, in order to perform the functions assigned to the Information Security Oversight Office under this order. An agency head may limit access to a special access program to the Director and no more than one other employee of the Information Security Oversight Office, or, for special access programs that are extraordinarily sensitive and vulnerable, to the Director only.
(4) The agency head or principal deputy shall review annually each special access program to determine whether it continues to meet the requirements of this order.
(5) Upon request, an agency head shall brief the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, or a designee, on any or all of the agency's special access programs.
(c) Nothing in this order shall supersede any requirement made by or under 10 U.S.C. 119.
Sec. 4.4.
Access by Historical Researchers and Certain Former Government Personnel. (a) The requirement in section 4.1(a)(3) of this order that access to classified information may be granted only to individuals who have a need-to-know the information may be waived for persons who:
(1) are engaged in historical research projects;
(2) previously have occupied policy-making positions to which they were appointed by the President under section 105(a)(2)(A) of title 3, United States Code, or the Vice President under 106(a)(1)(A) of title 3, United States Code; or
(3) served as President or Vice President.
(b) Waivers under this section may be granted only if the agency head or senior agency official of the originating agency:
(1) determines in writing that access is consistent with the interest of the national security;
(2) takes appropriate steps to protect classified information from unauthorized disclosure or compromise, and ensures that the information is safeguarded in a manner consistent with this order; andStart Printed Page 15327
(3) limits the access granted to former Presidential appointees and Vice Presidential appointees to items that the person originated, reviewed, signed, or received while serving as a Presidential appointee or a Vice Presidential appointee.
PART 5—IMPLEMENTATION AND REVIEW
Sec. 5.1.
Program Direction. (a) The Director of the Information Security Oversight Office, under the direction of the Archivist and in consultation with the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, shall issue such directives as are necessary to implement this order. These directives shall be binding upon the agencies. Directives issued by the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office shall establish standards for:
(1) classification and marking principles;
(2) safeguarding classified information, which shall pertain to the handling, storage, distribution, transmittal, and destruction of and accounting for classified information;
(3) agency security education and training programs;
(4) agency self-inspection programs; and
(5) classification and declassification guides.
(b) The Archivist shall delegate the implementation and monitoring functions of this program to the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office.
Sec. 5.2.
Information Security Oversight Office. (a) There is established within the National Archives an Information Security Oversight Office. The Archivist shall appoint the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office, subject to the approval of the President.
(b) Under the direction of the Archivist, acting in consultation with the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office shall:
(1) develop directives for the implementation of this order;
(2) oversee agency actions to ensure compliance with this order and its implementing directives;
(3) review and approve agency implementing regulations and agency guides for systematic declassification review prior to their issuance by the agency;
(4) have the authority to conduct on-site reviews of each agency's program established under this order, and to require of each agency those reports, information, and other cooperation that may be necessary to fulfill its responsibilities. If granting access to specific categories of classified information would pose an exceptional national security risk, the affected agency head or the senior agency official shall submit a written justification recommending the denial of access to the President through the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs within 60 days of the request for access. Access shall be denied pending the response;
(5) review requests for original classification authority from agencies or officials not granted original classification authority and, if deemed appropriate, recommend Presidential approval through the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs;
(6) consider and take action on complaints and suggestions from persons within or outside the Government with respect to the administration of the program established under this order;
(7) have the authority to prescribe, after consultation with affected agencies, standardization of forms or procedures that will promote the implementation of the program established under this order;
(8) report at least annually to the President on the implementation of this order; and
(9) convene and chair interagency meetings to discuss matters pertaining to the program established by this order.Start Printed Page 15328
Sec. 5.3.
Interagency Security Classification Appeals Panel.
(a) Establishment and administration.
(1) There is established an Interagency Security Classification Appeals Panel. The Departments of State, Defense, and Justice, the Central Intelligence Agency, the National Archives, and the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs shall each be represented by a senior-level representative who is a full-time or permanent part-time Federal officer or employee designated to serve as a member of the Panel by the respective agency head. The President shall select the Chair of the Panel from among the Panel members.
(2) A vacancy on the Panel shall be filled as quickly as possible as provided in paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
(3) The Director of the Information Security Oversight Office shall serve as the Executive Secretary. The staff of the Information Security Oversight Office shall provide program and administrative support for the Panel.
(4) The members and staff of the Panel shall be required to meet eligibility for access standards in order to fulfill the Panel's functions.
(5) The Panel shall meet at the call of the Chair. The Chair shall schedule meetings as may be necessary for the Panel to fulfill its functions in a timely manner.
(6) The Information Security Oversight Office shall include in its reports to the President a summary of the Panel's activities.
(b) Functions. The Panel shall:
(1) decide on appeals by persons who have filed classification challenges under section 1.8 of this order;
(2) approve, deny, or amend agency exemptions from automatic declassification as provided in section 3.3 of this order; and
(3) decide on appeals by persons or entities who have filed requests for mandatory declassification review under section 3.5 of this order.
(c) Rules and procedures. The Panel shall issue bylaws, which shall be published in the Federal Register. The bylaws shall establish the rules and procedures that the Panel will follow in accepting, considering, and issuing decisions on appeals. The rules and procedures of the Panel shall provide that the Panel will consider appeals only on actions in which:
(1) the appellant has exhausted his or her administrative remedies within the responsible agency;
(2) there is no current action pending on the issue within the Federal courts; and
(3) the information has not been the subject of review by the Federal courts or the Panel within the past 2 years.
(d) Agency heads shall cooperate fully with the Panel so that it can fulfill its functions in a timely and fully informed manner. An agency head may appeal a decision of the Panel to the President through the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs. The Panel shall report to the President through the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs any instance in which it believes that an agency head is not cooperating fully with the Panel.
(e) The Panel is established for the sole purpose of advising and assisting the President in the discharge of his constitutional and discretionary authority to protect the national security of the United States. Panel decisions are committed to the discretion of the Panel, unless changed by the President.
(f) Notwithstanding paragraphs (a) through (e) of this section, whenever the Panel reaches a conclusion that information owned or controlled by the Director of Central Intelligence (Director) should be declassified, and the Director notifies the Panel that he objects to its conclusion because he has determined that the information could reasonably be expected to Start Printed Page 15329cause damage to the national security and to reveal (1) the identity of a human intelligence source, or (2) information about the application of an intelligence source or method (including any information that concerns, or is provided as a result of, a relationship with a cooperating intelligence element of a foreign government), the information shall remain classified unless the Director's determination is appealed to the President, and the President reverses the determination.
Sec. 5.4.
General Responsibilities. Heads of agencies that originate or handle classified information shall:
(a) demonstrate personal commitment and commit senior management to the successful implementation of the program established under this order;
(b) commit necessary resources to the effective implementation of the program established under this order;
(c) ensure that agency records systems are designed and maintained to optimize the safeguarding of classified information, and to facilitate its declassification under the terms of this order when it no longer meets the standards for continued classification; and
(d) designate a senior agency official to direct and administer the program, whose responsibilities shall include:
(1) overseeing the agency's program established under this order, provided, an agency head may designate a separate official to oversee special access programs authorized under this order. This official shall provide a full accounting of the agency's special access programs at least annually;
(2) promulgating implementing regulations, which shall be published in the Federal Register to the extent that they affect members of the public;
(3) establishing and maintaining security education and training programs;
(4) establishing and maintaining an ongoing self-inspection program, which shall include the periodic review and assessment of the agency's classified product;
(5) establishing procedures to prevent unnecessary access to classified information, including procedures that:
(A)
require that a need for access to classified information is established before initiating administrative clearance procedures; and
(B)
ensure that the number of persons granted access to classified information is limited to the minimum consistent with operational and security requirements and needs;
(6) developing special contingency plans for the safeguarding of classified information used in or near hostile or potentially hostile areas;
(7) ensuring that the performance contract or other system used to rate civilian or military personnel performance includes the management of classified information as a critical element or item to be evaluated in the rating of:
(A)
original classification authorities;
(B)
security managers or security specialists; and
(C)
all other personnel whose duties significantly involve the creation or handling of classified information;
(8) accounting for the costs associated with the implementation of this order, which shall be reported to the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office for publication; and
(9) assigning in a prompt manner agency personnel to respond to any request, appeal, challenge, complaint, or suggestion arising out of this order that pertains to classified information that originated in a component of the agency that no longer exists and for which there is no clear successor in function.
Sec. 5.5.
Sanctions. (a) If the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office finds that a violation of this order or its implementing directives Start Printed Page 15330has occurred, the Director shall make a report to the head of the agency or to the senior agency official so that corrective steps, if appropriate, may be taken.
(b) Officers and employees of the United States Government, and its contractors, licensees, certificate holders, and grantees shall be subject to appropriate sanctions if they knowingly, willfully, or negligently:
(1) disclose to unauthorized persons information properly classified under this order or predecessor orders;
(2) classify or continue the classification of information in violation of this order or any implementing directive;
(3) create or continue a special access program contrary to the requirements of this order; or
(4) contravene any other provision of this order or its implementing directives.
(c) Sanctions may include reprimand, suspension without pay, removal, termination of classification authority, loss or denial of access to classified information, or other sanctions in accordance with applicable law and agency regulation.
(d) The agency head, senior agency official, or other supervisory official shall, at a minimum, promptly remove the classification authority of any individual who demonstrates reckless disregard or a pattern of error in applying the classification standards of this order.
(e) The agency head or senior agency official shall:
(1) take appropriate and prompt corrective action when a violation or infraction under paragraph (b) of this section occurs; and
(2) notify the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office when a violation under paragraph (b)(1), (2), or (3) of this section occurs.
PART 6—GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 6.1.
Definitions. For purposes of this order:
(a) “Access” means the ability or opportunity to gain knowledge of classified information.
(b) “Agency” means any “Executive agency,” as defined in 5 U.S.C. 105; any “Military department” as defined in 5 U.S.C. 102; and any other entity within the executive branch that comes into the possession of classified information.
(c) “Automated information system” means an assembly of computer hardware, software, or firmware configured to collect, create, communicate, compute, disseminate, process, store, or control data or information.
(d) “Automatic declassification” means the declassification of information based solely upon:
(1) the occurrence of a specific date or event as determined by the original classification authority; or
(2) the expiration of a maximum time frame for duration of classification established under this order.
(e) “Classification” means the act or process by which information is determined to be classified information.
(f) “Classification guidance” means any instruction or source that prescribes the classification of specific information.
(g) “Classification guide” means a documentary form of classification guidance issued by an original classification authority that identifies the elements of information regarding a specific subject that must be classified and establishes the level and duration of classification for each such element.
(h) “Classified national security information” or “classified information” means information that has been determined pursuant to this order or any Start Printed Page 15331predecessor order to require protection against unauthorized disclosure and is marked to indicate its classified status when in documentary form.
(i) “Confidential source” means any individual or organization that has provided, or that may reasonably be expected to provide, information to the United States on matters pertaining to the national security with the expectation that the information or relationship, or both, are to be held in confidence.
(j) “Damage to the national security” means harm to the national defense or foreign relations of the United States from the unauthorized disclosure of information, taking into consideration such aspects of the information as the sensitivity, value, utility, and provenance of that information.
(k) “Declassification” means the authorized change in the status of information from classified information to unclassified information.
(l) “Declassification authority” means:
(1) the official who authorized the original classification, if that official is still serving in the same position;
(2) the originator's current successor in function;
(3) a supervisory official of either; or
(4) officials delegated declassification authority in writing by the agency head or the senior agency official.
(m) “Declassification guide” means written instructions issued by a declassification authority that describes the elements of information regarding a specific subject that may be declassified and the elements that must remain classified.
(n) “Derivative classification” means the incorporating, paraphrasing, restating, or generating in new form information that is already classified, and marking the newly developed material consistent with the classification markings that apply to the source information. Derivative classification includes the classification of information based on classification guidance. The duplication or reproduction of existing classified information is not derivative classification.
(o) “Document” means any recorded information, regardless of the nature of the medium or the method or circumstances of recording.
(p) “Downgrading” means a determination by a declassification authority that information classified and safeguarded at a specified level shall be classified and safeguarded at a lower level.
(q) “File series” means file units or documents arranged according to a filing system or kept together because they relate to a particular subject or function, result from the same activity, document a specific kind of transaction, take a particular physical form, or have some other relationship arising out of their creation, receipt, or use, such as restrictions on access or use.
(r) “Foreign government information” means:
(1) information provided to the United States Government by a foreign government or governments, an international organization of governments, or any element thereof, with the expectation that the information, the source of the information, or both, are to be held in confidence;
(2) information produced by the United States Government pursuant to or as a result of a joint arrangement with a foreign government or governments, or an international organization of governments, or any element thereof, requiring that the information, the arrangement, or both, are to be held in confidence; or
(3) information received and treated as “foreign government information” under the terms of a predecessor order.
(s) “Information” means any knowledge that can be communicated or documentary material, regardless of its physical form or characteristics, that Start Printed Page 15332is owned by, produced by or for, or is under the control of the United States Government. “Control” means the authority of the agency that originates information, or its successor in function, to regulate access to the information.
(t) “Infraction” means any knowing, willful, or negligent action contrary to the requirements of this order or its implementing directives that does not constitute a “violation,” as defined below.
(u) “Integral file block” means a distinct component of a file series, as defined in this section, that should be maintained as a separate unit in order to ensure the integrity of the records. An integral file block may consist of a set of records covering either a specific topic or a range of time such as presidential administration or a 5-year retirement schedule within a specific file series that is retired from active use as a group.
(v) “Integrity” means the state that exists when information is unchanged from its source and has not been accidentally or intentionally modified, altered, or destroyed.
(w) “Mandatory declassification review” means the review for declassification of classified information in response to a request for declassification that meets the requirements under section 3.5 of this order.
(x) “Multiple sources” means two or more source documents, classification guides, or a combination of both.
(y) “National security” means the national defense or foreign relations of the United States.
(z) “Need-to-know” means a determination made by an authorized holder of classified information that a prospective recipient requires access to specific classified information in order to perform or assist in a lawful and authorized governmental function.
(aa) “Network” means a system of two or more computers that can exchange data or information.
(bb) “Original classification” means an initial determination that information requires, in the interest of the national security, protection against unauthorized disclosure.
(cc) “Original classification authority” means an individual authorized in writing, either by the President, the Vice President in the performance of executive duties, or by agency heads or other officials designated by the President, to classify information in the first instance.
(dd) “Records” means the records of an agency and Presidential papers or Presidential records, as those terms are defined in title 44, United States Code, including those created or maintained by a government contractor, licensee, certificate holder, or grantee that are subject to the sponsoring agency's control under the terms of the contract, license, certificate, or grant.
(ee) “Records having permanent historical value” means Presidential papers or Presidential records and the records of an agency that the Archivist has determined should be maintained permanently in accordance with title 44, United States Code.
(ff) “Records management” means the planning, controlling, directing, organizing, training, promoting, and other managerial activities involved with respect to records creation, records maintenance and use, and records disposition in order to achieve adequate and proper documentation of the policies and transactions of the Federal Government and effective and economical management of agency operations.
(gg) “Safeguarding” means measures and controls that are prescribed to protect classified information.
(hh) “Self-inspection” means the internal review and evaluation of individual agency activities and the agency as a whole with respect to the Start Printed Page 15333implementation of the program established under this order and its implementing directives.
(ii) “Senior agency official” means the official designated by the agency head under section 5.4(d) of this order to direct and administer the agency's program under which information is classified, safeguarded, and declassified.
(jj) “Source document” means an existing document that contains classified information that is incorporated, paraphrased, restated, or generated in new form into a new document.
(kk) “Special access program” means a program established for a specific class of classified information that imposes safeguarding and access requirements that exceed those normally required for information at the same classification level.
(ll) “Systematic declassification review” means the review for declassification of classified information contained in records that have been determined by the Archivist to have permanent historical value in accordance with title 44, United States Code.
(mm) “Telecommunications” means the preparation, transmission, or communication of information by electronic means.
(nn) “Unauthorized disclosure” means a communication or physical transfer of classified information to an unauthorized recipient.
(oo) “Violation” means:
(1) any knowing, willful, or negligent action that could reasonably be expected to result in an unauthorized disclosure of classified information;
(2) any knowing, willful, or negligent action to classify or continue the classification of information contrary to the requirements of this order or its implementing directives; or
(3) any knowing, willful, or negligent action to create or continue a special access program contrary to the requirements of this order.
(pp) “Weapons of mass destruction” means chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear weapons.
Sec. 6.2.
General Provisions. (a) Nothing in this order shall supersede any requirement made by or under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, or the National Security Act of 1947, as amended. “Restricted Data” and “Formerly Restricted Data” shall be handled, protected, classified, downgraded, and declassified in conformity with the provisions of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, and regulations issued under that Act.
(b) The Attorney General, upon request by the head of an agency or the Director of the Information Security Oversight Office, shall render an interpretation of this order with respect to any question arising in the course of its administration.
(c) Nothing in this order limits the protection afforded any information by other provisions of law, including the Constitution, Freedom of Information Act exemptions, the Privacy Act of 1974, and the National Security Act of 1947, as amended. This order is not intended to and does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, officers, employees, or agents. The foregoing is in addition to the specific provisos set forth in sections 3.1(b) and 5.3(e) of this order.”
(d) Executive Order 12356 of April 6, 1982, was revoked as of October 14, 1995.Start Printed Page 15334
Sec. 6.3.
Effective Date. This order is effective immediately, except for section 1.6, which shall become effective 180 days from the date of this order.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13293 of March 28, 2003
Amendment to Executive Order 10448, Establishing the
National Defense Service Medal
By the authority vested in me as President of the United States and as Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces of the United States, and in order to extend eligibility for the award of the National Defense Service Medal to members in good standing in the Selected Reserve of the Armed Forces of the United States, it is hereby ordered that Executive Order 10448 of April 22, 1953, as amended, is further amended:
1. by inserting “or service in good standing in the Selected Reserve of the Armed Forces” after “active military service” each place it appears; and
2. by striking “additional period of active duty” and inserting in lieu thereof “additional period.”
Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the exercise of authority granted by Executive Order 12776 of October 8, 1991.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 15919
Executive Order 13294 of March 28, 2003
Regulations Relating to Hazardous Duty Incentive Pay, Aviation Career Incentive Pay, and Submarine Duty Incentive Pay
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including sections 301, 301a, and 301c of title 37, United States Code, and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. The Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Commerce, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, and the Secretary of Homeland Security with respect to the Coast Guard when it is not operating as a service in the Navy, with respect to members of the uniformed services under their respective jurisdictions, are hereby designated and empowered to exercise, without approval, ratification, or other action by the President, the authority vested in the President by sections 301, 301a, and 301c of title 37, United States Code. The Secretaries shall consult each other in the exercise of such authority to ensure similar treatment for similarly situated members of the uniformed services unless the needs of their respective uniformed services require differing treatment.
Sec. 2. Executive Order 11157 of June 22, 1964, as amended, and Executive Order 11800 of August 17, 1974, as amended, are hereby revoked.
Sec. 3. This order is not intended to create, nor does it create, any right, benefit, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by a party against the United States, its agencies, officers, employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 17255
Executive Order 13295 of April 4, 2003
Revised List of Quarantinable Communicable Diseases
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 361(b) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 264(b)), it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Based upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Health and Human Services (the “Secretary”), in consultation with the Surgeon General, and for the purpose of specifying certain communicable diseases for regulations providing for the apprehension, detention, or conditional release of individuals to prevent the introduction, transmission, or spread of suspected communicable diseases, the following communicable diseases are hereby specified pursuant to section 361(b) of the Public Health Service Act:
(a) Cholera; Diphtheria; infectious Tuberculosis; Plague; Smallpox; Yellow Fever; and Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers (Lassa, Marburg, Ebola, Crimean-Congo, South American, and others not yet isolated or named).
(b) Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), which is a disease associated with fever and signs and symptoms of pneumonia or other respiratory illness, is transmitted from person to person predominantly by the aerosolized or droplet route, and, if spread in the population, would have severe public health consequences.
Sec. 2. The Secretary, in the Secretary's discretion, shall determine whether a particular condition constitutes a communicable disease of the type specified in section 1 of this order.
Sec. 3. The functions of the President under sections 362 and 364(a) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 265 and 267(a)) are assigned to the Secretary.
Sec. 4. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit enforceable at law or equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
Sec. 5. Executive Order 12452 of December 22, 1983, is hereby revoked.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13296 of April 18, 2003
Amendments to Executive Order 13045, Protection of Children From Environmental Health Risks and Safety Risks
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to extend the Task Force on Environmental Health Risks and Safety Risks to Children, and for other purposes, it is hereby ordered that Executive Order 13045 of April 21, 1997, as amended, is further amended as follows:
Section 1. Subsection 3-303(o) is amended by striking “Assistant to the President and”.
Sec. 2. Section 3-305 is amended by:
(a) striking “cabinet agencies and other agencies identified” and inserting in lieu thereof “executive departments, the Environmental Protection Agency, and other agencies identified”; and
(b) inserting the following new language after the second sentence: “Each report shall also detail the accomplishments of the Task Force from the date of the preceding report.”
Sec. 3. Section 3-306 is amended by:
(a) striking “6 years” and inserting in lieu thereof “8 years”; and
(b) striking the second sentence.
Sec. 4. Section 6-601, the second sentence, is amended by deleting “an annual” and inserting “a biennial” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 5. Section 6-603, the third sentence, is amended by deleting “submitted annually” and inserting “published biennially” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 6. Section 7 is amended by adding new section 7-703 as follows: “7-703. Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.”
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13297 of April 23, 2003
Applying the Federal Physicians Comparability Allowance Amendments of 2000 to Participants in the Foreign Service Retirement and Disability System, the Foreign Service Pension System, and the Central Intelligence Agency Retirement and Disability System
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 827 of the Foreign Service Act of 1980 (22 U.S.C. 4067), section 292 of the Central Intelligence Agency Retirement Act of 1964 (50 U.S.C. 2141), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and in order to conform the Foreign Service Retirement and Disability System, the Foreign Service Pension System, and the Central Intelligence Agency Retirement and Disability System to the Civil Service Retirement System, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Foreign Service Retirement and Disability System. (a) The following provisions of the Federal Physicians Comparability Allowance Amendments of 2000 (Public Law 106-571) shall apply to the Foreign Service Retirement and Disability System, subchapter I of chapter 8 of the Foreign Service Act of 1980, as amended:
(i) Section 3(a) of Public Law 106-571 to provide that any amount received under section 5948 of title 5, United States Code (physicians comparability allowance), be included in the definition of basic pay; and
(ii) Section 3(b) of Public Law 106-571 to provide for the inclusion of the physicians comparability allowance in the computation of an annuity under the same rules that apply with respect to the Civil Service Retirement System.
(b) The Secretary of State shall issue regulations that reflect the application of sections 3(a) and 3(b) of Public Law 106-571 to the Foreign Service Retirement and Disability System. Such regulations shall provide that the foregoing provisions be retroactive to December 28, 2000.
Sec. 2.
Foreign Service Pension System. (a) The following provisions of the Federal Physicians Comparability Allowance Amendments of 2000 (Public Law 106-571) shall apply to the Foreign Service Pension System, subchapter II of chapter 8 of the Foreign Service Act of 1980, as amended:
(i) Section 3(a) of Public Law 106-571 to provide that any amount received under section 5948 of title 5, United States Code (physicians comparability allowance), be included in the definition of basic pay; and
(ii) Section 3(c) of Public Law 106-571 to provide for the inclusion of the physicians comparability allowance in the computation of an annuity under the same rules that apply with respect to the Federal Employees Retirement System.
(b) The Secretary of State shall issue regulations that reflect the application of sections 3(a) and 3(c) of Public Law 106-571 to the Foreign Service Pension System. Such regulations shall provide that the foregoing provisions be retroactive to December 28, 2000.
Sec. 3.
Central Intelligence Agency Retirement and Disability System.
(a) The following provisions of the Federal Physicians Comparability Allowance Amendments of 2000 (Public Law 106-571) shall apply to the Start Printed Page 22566Central Intelligence Agency Retirement and Disability System, title II of the Central Intelligence Agency Retirement Act of 1964, as amended:
(i) Section 3(a) of Public Law 106-571 to provide that any amount received under section 5948 of title 5, United States Code (physicians comparability allowance), be included in the definition of basic pay; and
(ii) Section 3(b) of Public Law 106-571 to provide for the inclusion of the physicians comparability allowance in the computation of an annuity under the same rules that apply with respect to the Civil Service Retirement System.
(b) The Director of Central Intelligence shall issue regulations to reflect the application of sections 3(a) and 3(b) of Public Law 106-571 to the Central Intelligence Agency Retirement and Disability System. Such regulations shall provide that the foregoing provisions be retroactive to December 28, 2000.
Sec. 4.
Judicial Review. This order is not intended to create, nor does it create any right, benefit, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by a party against the United States, its agencies, its officers, employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13298 of May 6, 2003
Termination of Emergency With Respect to the Actions and Policies of Unita and Revocation of Related Executive Orders
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) (NEA), section 5 of the United Nations Participation Act of 1945, as amended (22 U.S.C. 287c), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and in view of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1448 of December 9, 2002,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, find that the situation that gave rise to the declaration of a national emergency in Executive Order 12865 of September 26, 1993, with respect to the actions and policies of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA), and that led to the steps taken in that order and in Executive Order 13069 of December 12, 1997, and Executive Order 13098 of August 18, 1998, has been significantly altered by the recent and continuing steps toward peace taken by the Government of Angola and UNITA. Accordingly, I hereby terminate the national emergency declared in Executive Order 12865, revoke Executive Orders 12865, 13069, and 13098, and order:
Section
1. Pursuant to section 202 of the NEA (50 U.S.C. 1622), termination of the national emergency with respect to the actions and policies of UNITA shall not affect any action taken or proceeding pending, not finally concluded or determined as of the effective date of this order, or any action or proceeding based on any act committed prior to the effective date of this order, or any rights or duties that matured or penalties that were incurred prior to the effective date of this order.
Sec.
2. This order in not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, or its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees, or agents.
Sec.
3. (a) This order is effective 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time on May 7, 2003.Start Printed Page 24858
(b) This order shall be transmitted to the Congress and published in the Federal Register.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13299 of May 12, 2003
Interagency Group on Insular Areas
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section
1.
Interagency Group on Insular Areas. (a) There is established, within the Department of the Interior for administrative purposes, the Interagency Group on Insular Areas (IGIA). The group shall consist exclusively of:
(i) the heads of the executive departments; and
(ii) the heads of such agencies as the Secretary of the Interior may designate.
(b) The Secretary of the Interior, or the Secretary's designee under section 1(c) of this order, shall convene and preside at the meetings of the IGIA, determine its agenda, direct its work and, as appropriate to deal with particular subject matters, establish and direct subgroups of the IGIA that shall consist exclusively of members of the IGIA.
(c) A member of the IGIA may designate, to perform the IGIA or IGIA subgroup functions of the member, any person who is a part of the member's department or agency (agency) and who is either an officer of the United States appointed by the President or a member of the Senior Executive Service.
Sec.
2.
Functions of the IGIA. The IGIA shall:
(a) provide advice on establishment or implementation of policies concerning American Samoa, Guam, the United States Virgin Islands, and the Commonwealth of Northern Mariana Islands (Insular Areas) to:
(i) the President, through the Office of Intergovernmental Affairs in the White House Office, in written reports, at least once each year; and
(ii) the Secretary of the Interior;
(b) obtain information and advice concerning Insular Areas from governors and other elected officials in the Insular Areas (including through a meeting at least once each year with such governors of the Insular Areas who may wish to attend) in a manner that seeks their individual advice and does not involve collective judgment or consensus advice or deliberation;
(c) obtain information and advice concerning Insular Areas, as the IGIA determines appropriate, from representatives of entities or other individuals in a manner that seeks their individual advice and does not involve collective judgment or consensus advice or deliberation; and
(d) at the request of the head of any agency who is a member of the IGIA, unless the Secretary of the Interior declines the request, promptly review and provide advice on a policy or policy implementation action affecting one of the Insular Areas proposed by that agency.
Sec.
3.
General Provisions. (a) The Secretary of the Interior may, as the Secretary determines appropriate, make recommendations to the President, or to the heads of agencies, regarding policy or policy implementation actions of the Federal Government affecting the Insular Areas.
(b) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
Sec.
4.
Judicial Review. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and is not intended to, and does Start Printed Page 25478not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13300 of May 9, 2003
Facilitating the Administration of Justice in the Federal Courts
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to promote the prompt appointment of judges to the Federal courts, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. The Federal courts play a central role in the American justice system. For the Federal courts to function effectively, judicial vacancies in those courts must be filled in a timely manner with well-qualified candidates.
Sec. 2.
Plan. The presidential plan announced on October 30, 2002, calls for timely consideration of judicial nominees, with the President submitting a nomination to fill a vacancy in United States courts of appeals and district courts within 180 days after the President receives notice of a vacancy or intended retirement, absent extraordinary circumstances.
Sec. 3.
Responsibilities. The Counsel to the President shall take all appropriate steps to ensure that the President is in a position to make timely nominations for judicial vacancies consistent with this plan. All Federal departments and agencies shall assist, as requested and permitted by law, in the implementation of this order.
Sec. 4.
Reservation of Authority. Nothing in this order shall be construed to affect the authority of the President to fill vacancies under clause 3 of section 2 of article II of the Constitution.
Sec. 5.
Judicial Review. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13301 of May 14, 2003
Increasing the Number of Members on the Intelligence Oversight Board
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered that Executive Order 12863 of September 13, 1993, as amended by Executive Order 13070 of December 16, 1997, is further amended by deleting the word “four” from the first sentence of section 2.1 and inserting in its place the word “five”.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 27429
Executive Order 13302 of May 15, 2003
Amending Executive Order 13212, Actions to Expedite
Energy-Related Projects
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, including section 60133 of title 49, United States Code, and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Amendments to Executive Order 13212. Executive Order 13212 of May 18, 2001, as amended, is further amended by:
(a) in section 1, immediately before the period at the end of the section, inserting “and projects that will strengthen pipeline safety”;
(b) in section 2, after “energy-related projects” inserting “(including pipeline safety projects)”; and
(c) revising section 3 to read as follows:
“Sec. 3.
Interagency Task Force. (a) There is established, within the Department of Energy for administrative purposes, an interagency task force (Task Force) to perform the following functions: (i) monitor and assist the agencies in their efforts to expedite their reviews of permits or similar actions, as necessary, to accelerate the completion of energy-related projects (including pipeline safety projects), increase energy production and conservation, and improve the transmission of energy;
(ii) monitor and assist agencies in setting up appropriate mechanisms to coordinate Federal, State, tribal, and local permitting in geographic areas where increased permitting activity is expected; and
(iii) perform the functions of the interagency committee for which section 60133 of title 49, United States Code, provides.
(b)(i) The Task Force shall consist exclusively of the following members:
(A) in the performance of all Task Force functions set out in sections 3(a)(i) and (ii) of this order, the Secretaries of State, the Treasury, Defense, Agriculture, Housing and Urban Development, Commerce, Transportation, the Interior, Labor, Education, Health and Human Services, Energy, and Veterans Affairs, the Attorney General, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Director of Central Intelligence, the Administrator of General Services, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, the Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy, the Assistant to the President for Economic Policy, and such other heads of agencies as the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality may designate; and
(B) in the performance of the functions to which section 3(a)(iii) of this order refers, the officers listed in section 60133(a)(2)(A)-(H) of title 49, United States Code, and such other representatives of Federal agencies with responsibilities relating to pipeline repair projects as the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality may designate.
(ii) A member of the Task Force may designate, to perform the Task Force functions of the member, a full-time officer or employee of that member's agency or office.
(c) The Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality shall chair the Task Force.Start Printed Page 27430
(d) Consultation in the implementation of this order with State and local officials and other persons who are not full-time or permanent part-time employees of the Federal Government shall be conducted in a manner that elicits fully the individual views of each official or other person consulted, without deliberations or efforts to achieve consensus on advice or recommendations.
(e) This order shall be implemented in a manner consistent with the President's constitutional authority to supervise the unitary executive branch.”
Sec. 2.
Judicial Review. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government, and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its agencies, instrumentalities or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13303 of May 22, 2003
Protecting the Development Fund for Iraq and Certain Other Property in Which Iraq Has an Interest
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, as amended (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.), section 5 of the United Nations Participation Act, as amended (22 U.S.C. 287c) (UNPA), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, find that the threat of attachment or other judicial process against the Development Fund for Iraq, Iraqi petroleum and petroleum products, and interests therein, and proceeds, obligations, or any financial instruments of any nature whatsoever arising from or related to the sale or marketing thereof, and interests therein, obstructs the orderly reconstruction of Iraq, the restoration and maintenance of peace and security in the country, and the development of political, administrative, and economic institutions in Iraq. This situation constitutes an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States and I hereby declare a national emergency to deal with that threat.
I hereby order:
Section 1. Unless licensed or otherwise authorized pursuant to this order, any attachment, judgment, decree, lien, execution, garnishment, or other judicial process is prohibited, and shall be deemed null and void, with respect to the following:
(a) the Development Fund for Iraq, and
(b) all Iraqi petroleum and petroleum products, and interests therein, and proceeds, obligations, or any financial instruments of any nature whatsoever arising from or related to the sale or marketing thereof, and interests therein, in which any foreign country or a national thereof has any interest, that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of United States persons.
Sec. 2. (a) As of the effective date of this order, Executive Order 12722 of August 2, 1990, Executive Order 12724 of August 9, 1990, and Executive Order 13290 of March 20, 2003, shall not apply to the property and interests in property described in section 1 of this order.
(b) Nothing in this order is intended to affect the continued effectiveness of any rules, regulations, orders, licenses or other forms of administrative action issued, taken, or continued in effect heretofore or hereafter under Executive Orders 12722, 12724, or 13290, or under the authority of IEEPA or the UNPA, except as hereafter terminated, modified, or suspended by the issuing Federal agency and except as provided in section 2(a) of this order.
Sec. 3. For the purposes of this order:
(a) The term “person” means an individual or entity;
(b) The term “entity” means a partnership, association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization;
(c) The term “United States person” means any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United Start Printed Page 31932States or any jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States;
(d) The term “Iraqi petroleum and petroleum products” means any petroleum, petroleum products, or natural gas originating in Iraq, including any Iraqi-origin oil inventories, wherever located; and
(e) The term “Development Fund for Iraq” means the fund established on or about May 22, 2003, on the books of the Central Bank of Iraq, by the Administrator of the Coalition Provisional Authority responsible for the temporary governance of Iraq and all accounts held for the fund or for the Central Bank of Iraq in the name of the fund.
Sec. 4. (a) The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA and the UNPA as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government. All agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their statutory authority to carry out the provisions of this order.
(b) Nothing contained in this order shall relieve a person from any requirement to obtain a license or other authorization in compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
Sec. 5. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right, benefit, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
Sec. 6. This order shall be transmitted to the Congress and published in the Federal Register.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13304 of May 28, 2003
Termination of Emergencies With Respect to Yugoslavia and Modification of Executive Order 13219 of June 26, 2001
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, as amended (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) (NEA), section 5 of the United Nations Participation Act of 1945, as amended (22 U.S.C. 287c) (UNPA), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, have determined that the situations that gave rise to the declarations of national emergencies in Executive Order 12808 of May 30, 1992, and Executive Order 13088 of June 9, 1998, with respect to the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, have been significantly altered by the peaceful transition to democracy and other positive developments in Serbia and Montenegro (formerly the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)). Accordingly, I hereby terminate the national emergencies declared in those orders and revoke those and all related orders (Executive Orders 12810 of June 5, 1992, 12831 of January 15, 1993, 12846 of April 25, 1993, 12934 of October 25, 1994, 13121 of April 30, 1999, and 13192 of January 17, 2001). At the same time, and in order to take additional steps with respect to continuing, widespread, and illicit actions that obstruct implementation of the Ohrid Framework Agreement of 2001, relating to Macedonia, United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244 of June 10, 1999, relating to Kosovo, or the Dayton Accords or the Conclusions of the Peace Implementation Conference Council held in London on December 8-9, 1995, including the decisions or conclusions of the High Representative, the Peace Implementation Council or its Steering Board, relating to Bosnia and Herzegovina, including the harboring of individuals indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, and the national emergency described and declared in Executive Order 13219 of June 26, 2001, I hereby order:
Section 1. Pursuant to section 202 of the NEA (50 U.S.C. 1622), termination of the national emergencies declared in Executive Order 12808 of May 30, 1992, and Executive Order 13088 of June 9, 1998, shall not affect any action taken or proceeding pending not finally concluded or determined as of the effective date of this order, or any action or proceeding based on any act committed prior to such date, or any rights or duties that matured or penalties that were incurred prior to such date. Pursuant to section 207 of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1706), I hereby determine that the continuation of prohibitions with regard to transactions involving any property blocked pursuant to Executive Orders 12808 or 13088 that continues to be blocked as of the effective date of this order is necessary on account of claims involving successor states to the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia or other potential claimants.
Sec. 2. The Annex to Executive Order 13219 of June 26, 2001, is replaced and superseded in its entirety by the Annex to this order.
Sec. 3. (a) Section 1(a) and 1(b) of Executive Order 13219 are revised to read as follows:
“Section 1. (a) Except to the extent provided in section 203(b)(1), (3), and (4) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(1), (3), and (4)), and the Trade Sanctions Reform and Export Enhancement Act of 2000 (Title IX, Public Law 106-Start Printed Page 32316387), and in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may hereafter be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date of this order, all property and interests in property of:
(i) the persons listed in the Annex to this order; and
(ii) persons designated by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, because they are determined:
(A) to be under open indictment by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, unless circumstances warrant otherwise, or
(B) to have committed, or to pose a significant risk of committing, acts of violence that have the purpose or effect of threatening the peace in or diminishing the stability or security of any area or state in the Western Balkans region, undermining the authority, efforts, or objectives of international organizations or entities present in the region, or endangering the safety of persons participating in or providing support to the activities of those international organizations or entities, or
(C) to have actively obstructed, or pose a significant risk of actively obstructing, the Ohrid Framework Agreement of 2001 relating to Macedonia, United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244 relating to Kosovo, or the Dayton Accords or the Conclusions of the Peace Implementation Conference held in London on December 8-9, 1995, including the decisions or conclusions of the High Representative, the Peace Implementation Council or its Steering Board, relating to Bosnia and Herzegovina, or
(D) to have materially assisted in, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services in support of, such acts of violence or obstructionism or any person listed in or designated pursuant to this order, or
(E) to be owned or controlled by, or acting or purporting to act directly or indirectly for or on behalf of, any person listed in or designated pursuant to this order, that are or hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of United States persons, are blocked and may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in.
(b) I hereby determine that the making of donations of the type specified in section 203(b)(2) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)) by or to persons determined to be subject to the sanctions imposed under this order would seriously impair the ability to deal with the national emergency declared in this order, and hereby prohibit such donations as provided in paragraph (a) of this section.”
Sec. 4. New sections 7 and 8 are added to Executive Order 13219 to read as follows:
“Sec. 7. For those persons listed in the Annex to this order or determined to be subject to the sanctions imposed under this order who might have a constitutional presence in the United States, I have determined that, because of the ability to transfer funds or assets instantaneously, prior notice to such persons of measures to be taken pursuant to this order would render these measures ineffectual. I therefore determine that for these measures to be effective in addressing the national emergency declared in this order, there need be no prior notice of a listing or determination made pursuant to this order.
Sec. 8. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is authorized to determine, subsequent to the issuance of this order, that circumstances no longer warrant inclusion of a person in the Annex to this order and that such person is therefore no longer covered within the scope of the sanctions set forth herein. Such a determination shall become effective upon publication in the Federal Register.”
Sec. 5. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation Start Printed Page 32317of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA and UNPA, as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government. All agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order and, where appropriate, to advise the Secretary of the Treasury in a timely manner of the measures taken.
Sec. 6. Nothing contained in this order shall create any right or benefit or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its agencies or instrumentalities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
Sec. 7. This order is effective at 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time on May 29, 2003. This order shall be transmitted to the Congress and published in the Federal Register.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
May 28, 2003.
Start Printed Page 32318
Start Printed Page 32319
Start Printed Page 32320
Start Printed Page 32321
Start Printed Page 32322
Executive Order 13305 of May 28, 2003
Extension of the President's Information Technology Advisory Committee and the President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the High-Performance Computing Act of 1991 (Public Law 102-194), as amended by the Next Generation Internet Research Act of 1998 (Public Law 105-305), and in order to extend the life of the President's Information Technology Advisory Committee and the President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology so that they may continue to carry out their responsibilities, it is hereby ordered as follows:
1. That section 4(b) of Executive Order 13035, as amended, is further amended by deleting “June 1, 2003,” and inserting in lieu thereof “June 1, 2005,”.
2. That section 4(b) of Executive Order 13226 is amended by deleting “2 years from the date of this order,” and inserting in lieu thereof “September 30, 2005,”.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13306 of May 28, 2003
Establishing the Bob Hope American Patriot Award
By the authority vested in me as President and as Commander in Chief by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment of the Award. In order to encourage love of country, service to the people of the United States, and support for our Armed Forces, and in order to recognize the unique and lifelong service of Bob Hope to the United States Armed Forces and to the Nation through his unwavering patriotism and dedication to maintaining the morale of the troops he entertained for nearly six decades, and on the occasion of his 100th birthday, there is hereby established the Bob Hope American Patriot Award (Award).
Sec. 2.
Granting and Presentation of the Award.
(a) The Award may be granted by the President, in his sole discretion, to any civilian individual who has demonstrated extraordinary love of country and devotion to the personnel of the United States Armed Forces, in the form of true patriotism. The Award may also be granted by the President to an organization that meets the same criteria.
(b) Other than in exceptional circumstances, no more than one Award may be granted in any given year.
(c) The presentation of the Award may take place at any time during the year.
(d) Subject to the provisions of this order, the Award may be conferred posthumously.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 33338
Executive Order 13307 of May 29, 2003
European Central Bank
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including sections 1 and 15 of the International Organizations Immunities Act (22 U.S.C. 288 and 288f-5), I hereby extend to the European Central Bank the privileges, exemptions, and immunities provided to public international organizations designated by the President under the International Organizations Immunities Act.
This extension of such privileges, exemptions, and immunities is not intended to abridge in any respect privileges, exemptions, or immunities that the European Central Bank otherwise may have acquired or may acquire by international agreements or by law.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13308 of June 20, 2003
Further Amendment to Executive Order 12580, as Amended, Superfund Implementation
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 115 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, as amended (42 U.S.C. 9601 et seq.) (the “Act”), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, Executive Order 12580 of January 23, 1987, is hereby amended as follows:
Section 1. In Section 1(b)(1), the phrase “Sections 105(a), (b), (c), and (g)” is revised to read “Sections 105(a), (b), (c), (g) and (h)”.
Sec. 2. In Section 5, a new subsection (f) and a new subsection (g) are added to read as follows:
“(f) The functions vested in the President by Section 107(o) and (p) of the Act are delegated to the heads of the Executive departments and agencies, to be exercised in consultation with the Administrator, with respect to releases or threatened releases where either the release is on or the sole source of the release is from any facility under the jurisdiction, custody, or control of those departments and agencies.
(g) Subject to subsection (f) of this Section, the functions vested in the President by Section 107(o) and (p) of the Act are delegated to the Administrator except that, with respect to determinations regarding natural resource restoration, the Administrator shall make such determinations in consultation with the appropriate Federal natural resource trustee.”
Sec. 3. New Sections 12, 13, and 14 are added to read as follows:
“Sec. 12.
Brownfields.
(a) The functions vested in the President by Sections 101(39) and (41) and 104(k) of the Act are delegated to the Administrator.
(b) The functions vested in the President by Section 128(b)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act are delegated to the heads of the Executive departments and agencies, to be exercised in consultation with the Administrator, with respect to property subject to their jurisdiction, custody, or control.
(c) The functions vested in the President by Section 128(b)(1)(E) of the Act are delegated to the heads of Executive departments and agencies in cases where they have acted under subsection (b) of this Section.
(d) Subject to subsections (b) and (c) of this Section, the functions vested in the President by Section 128 of the Act are delegated to the Administrator.
“Sec. 13.
Preservation of Authorities.
Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
Start Printed Page 37692
“Sec. 14.
General Provision.
This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.”
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 44851
Executive Order 13309 of July 25, 2003
Amendments to Executive Order 12994, and Renaming the President's Committee on Mental Retardation as the President's Committee for People with Intellectual Disabilities
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to change the name of the “President's Committee on Mental Retardation” to the “President's Committee for People with Intellectual Disabilities” (the “Committee”) and expand the membership of the Committee, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. The President's Committee on Mental Retardation is hereby renamed the President's Committee for People with Intellectual Disabilities.
Sec. 2. Executive Order 12994 of March 21, 1996, is hereby amended by deleting the words “mental retardation” and inserting the words “intellectual disabilities” in lieu thereof throughout the text of that order, except in the title, the first line of the preamble, and section 1 of that order.
Sec. 3. Section 1 of Executive Order 12994 is amended by deleting the words “(the “Committee”)” and adding after “responsibilities,” the words “and renamed the President's Committee for People with Intellectual Disabilities (the “Committee”),”.
Sec. 4. Section 2 of Executive Order 12994 is amended by inserting after “(5) The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development;” the following: “(6) The Secretary of Commerce; (7) The Secretary of Transportation; (8) The Secretary of the Interior; (9) The Secretary of Homeland Security;” and renumbering former subsections (6) through (9) as subsections (10) through (13).
Sec. 5. The Committee is continued until September 30, 2005.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 44853
Executive Order 13310 of July 28, 2003
Blocking Property of the Government of Burma and Prohibiting Certain Transactions
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.), the Burmese Freedom and Democracy Act of 2003 (July 28, 2003), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and in order to take additional steps with respect to the Government of Burma's continued repression of the democratic opposition in Burma and with respect to the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13047 of May 20, 1997;
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, hereby order:
Section 1. Except to the extent provided in section 203(b)(1), (3), and (4) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(1), (3), and (4)), the Trade Sanctions Reform and Export Enhancement Act of 2000 (title IX, Public Law 106-387) (TSRA), or regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date of this order, all property and interests in property of the following persons that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of United States persons, including their overseas branches, are blocked and may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in:
(a) the persons listed in the Annex attached and made a part of this order; and
(b) any person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State,
(i)
to be a senior official of the Government of Burma, the State Peace and Development Council of Burma, the Union Solidarity and Development Association of Burma, or any successor entity to any of the foregoing; or
(ii)
to be owned or controlled by, or acting or purporting to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order.
Sec. 2. Except to the extent provided in section 203(b) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)), the TSRA, or regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date of this order, the following are prohibited:
(a) the exportation or reexportation, directly or indirectly, to Burma of any financial services either (i) from the United States or (ii) by a United States person, wherever located; and
(b) any approval, financing, facilitation, or guarantee by a United States person, wherever located, of a transaction by a foreign person where the transaction by that foreign person would be prohibited by this order if performed by a United States person or within the United States;
Sec. 3. Beginning 30 days after the effective date of this order, and except to the extent provided in section 8 of this order and in regulations, orders, Start Printed Page 44854directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to 30 days after the effective date of this order, the importation into the United States of any article that is a product of Burma is hereby prohibited.
Sec. 4. (a) Any transaction by a United States person or within the United States that evades or avoids, has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
(b) Any conspiracy formed to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
Sec. 5. For purposes of this order:
(a) the term “person” means an individual or entity;
(b) the term “entity” means a partnership, association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization;
(c) the term “United States person” means any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States; and
(d) the term “Government of Burma” means the Government of Burma (sometimes referred to as Myanmar), its agencies, instrumentalities and controlled entities, and the Central Bank of Burma.
Sec. 6. I hereby determine that the making of donations of the type specified in section 203(b)(2) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)) by or to persons whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to section 1 of this order would seriously impair my ability to deal with the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13047, and hereby prohibit such donations as provided by section 1 of this order.
Sec. 7. For those persons whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to section 1 of this order who might have a constitutional presence in the United States, I find that because of the ability to transfer funds or other assets instantaneously, prior notice to such persons of measures to be taken pursuant to this order would render these measures ineffectual. I therefore determine that for these measures to be effective in addressing the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13047, there need be no prior notice of a listing or determination made pursuant to this order.
Sec. 8. Determining that such a waiver is in the national interest of the United States, I hereby waive the prohibitions described in section 3 of the Burmese Freedom and Democracy Act of 2003 with respect to any and all articles that are a product of Burma to the extent that prohibiting the importation of such articles would conflict with the international obligations of the United States under the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations, the United Nations Headquarters Agreement, and other legal instruments providing equivalent privileges and immunities.
Sec. 9. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA and sections 3(a) and 4 of the Burmese Freedom and Democracy Act of 2003, other than the authority to make the determinations and certification to the Congress that Burma has met the conditions described in 3(a)(3) of the Act, as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government consistent with applicable law. The Secretary of State is authorized to exercise the functions and authorities conferred upon the President by section 3(b) of the Burmese Freedom and Democracy Act of 2003 and to redelegate these functions and authorities consistent with applicable law. All agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order.Start Printed Page 44855
Sec. 10. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is authorized to determine, subsequent to the issuance of this order, that circumstances no longer warrant inclusion of a person in the Annex to this order and that the property and interests in property of that person are therefore no longer blocked pursuant to section 1 of this order.
Sec. 11. Nothing in this order is intended to affect the continued effectiveness of any rules, regulations, orders, licenses, or other forms of administrative action issued, taken, or continued in effect heretofore or hereafter under 31 C.F.R. chapter V, except as expressly terminated, modified, or suspended by or pursuant to this order.
Sec. 12. Sections 1 through 7 of Executive Order 13047 are hereby revoked to the extent they are inconsistent with this order. All delegations, rules, regulations, orders, licenses, and other forms of administrative action made, issued, or otherwise taken under Executive Order 13047, not inconsistent with section 3 of this order and not revoked administratively, shall remain in full force and effect under this order until amended, modified, or terminated by proper authority. The revocation of any provision of Executive Order 13047 pursuant to this section shall not affect any violation of any rules, regulations, orders, licenses, or other forms of administrative action under that order during the period that such provision of that order was in effect.
Sec. 13. All provisions of this order other than section 3 shall not apply to any activity, or any transaction incident to an activity, undertaken pursuant to an agreement, or pursuant to the exercise of rights under such an agreement, that was entered into by a United States person with the Government of Burma or a nongovernmental entity in Burma prior to 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time on May 21, 1997.
Sec. 14. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
Sec. 15. This order is effective on 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time on July 29, 2003.
Sec. 16. This order shall be transmitted to the Congress and published in the Federal Register.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
July 28, 2003.
Start Printed Page 44856
Annex
The State Peace and Development Council of Burma
Myanma Foreign Trade Bank (a.k.a. Myanmar Foreign Trade Bank)
Myanma Investment and Commercial Bank (a.k.a. MICB; a.k.a. Myanmar Investment and Commercial Bank)
Start Printed Page 45149
Executive Order 13311 of July 29, 2003
Homeland Security Information Sharing
By the authority vested in me by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, including sections 892 and 893 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (the “Act”) (6 U.S.C. 482 and 483) and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Assignment of Functions. (a) The functions of the President under section 892 of the Act are assigned to the Secretary of Homeland Security (the “Secretary”), except the functions of the President under subsections 892(a)(2) and 892(b)(7).
(b) Subject to section 2(b) of this order, the function of the President under section 893 of the Act is assigned to the Secretary.
(c) Procedures issued by the Secretary in the performance of the function of the President under section 892(a)(1) of the Act shall apply to all agencies of the Federal Government. Such procedures shall specify that the President may make, or may authorize another officer of the United States to make, exceptions to the procedures.
(d) The function of the President under section 892(b)(7) of the Act is delegated to the Attorney General and the Director of Central Intelligence, to be exercised jointly.
(e) In performing the functions assigned to the Secretary by subsection (a) of this section, the Secretary shall coordinate with the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, the Attorney General, the Secretary of Energy, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, the Director of Central Intelligence, the Archivist of the United States, and as the Secretary deems appropriate, other officers of the United States.
(f) A determination, under the procedures issued by the Secretary in the performance of the function of the President under section 892(a)(1) of the Act, as to whether, or to what extent, an individual who falls within the category of “State and local personnel” as defined in sections 892(f)(3) and (f)(4) of the Act shall have access to information classified pursuant to Executive Order 12958 of April 17, 1995, as amended, is a discretionary determination and shall be conclusive and not subject to review or appeal.
Sec. 2.
Rules of Construction. Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(a) the authority of the Director of Central Intelligence under section 103(c)(7) of the National Security Act of 1947, as amended (50 U.S.C. 403-3(c)(7)), to protect intelligence sources and methods from unauthorized disclosure;
(b) the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals; or
(c) the provisions of Executive Orders 12958 of April 17, 1995, as amended, and 12968 of August 2, 1995, as amended.
Start Printed Page 45150
Sec. 3.
General Provision. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, against the United States, its departments, agencies, or other entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 45151
Executive Order 13312 of July 29, 2003
Implementing the Clean Diamond Trade Act
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Clean Diamond Trade Act (Public Law 108-19) (the “Act”), the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, as amended (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.), section 5 of the United Nations Participation Act, as amended (22 U.S.C. 287c), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and in view of the national emergency described and declared in Executive Order 13194 of January 18, 2001, and expanded in scope in Executive Order 13213 of May 22, 2001,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, note that, in response to the role played by the illicit trade in diamonds in fueling conflict and human rights violations in Sierra Leone, the President declared a national emergency in Executive Order 13194 and imposed restrictions on the importation of rough diamonds into the United States from Sierra Leone. I expanded the scope of that emergency in Executive Order 13213 and prohibited absolutely the importation of rough diamonds from Liberia. I further note that representatives of the United States and numerous other countries announced in the Interlaken Declaration of November 5, 2002, the launch of the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme (KPCS) for rough diamonds, under which Participants prohibit the importation of rough diamonds from, or the exportation of rough diamonds to, a non-Participant and require that shipments of rough diamonds from or to a Participant be controlled through the KPCS. The Clean Diamond Trade Act authorizes the President to take steps to implement the KPCS. Therefore, in order to implement the Act, to harmonize Executive Orders 13194 and 13213 with the Act, to address further threats to international peace and security posed by the trade in conflict diamonds, and to avoid undermining the legitimate diamond trade, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Prohibitions. Notwithstanding the existence of any rights or obligations conferred or imposed by any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to July 30, 2003, the following are, except to the extent a waiver issued under section 4(b) of the Act applies, prohibited:
(a) the importation into, or exportation from, the United States on or after July 30, 2003, of any rough diamond, from whatever source, unless the rough diamond has been controlled through the KPCS;
(b) any transaction by a United States person anywhere, or any transaction that occurs in whole or in part within the United States, that evades or avoids, or has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate, any of the prohibitions set forth in this section; and
(c) any conspiracy formed to violate any of the prohibitions of this section.
Sec. 2.
Assignment of Functions. (a) The functions of the President under the Act are assigned as follows:
(i) sections 4(b), 5(c), 6(b), 11, and 12 to the Secretary of State; and
(ii) sections 5(a) and 5(b) to the Secretary of the Treasury.
(b) The Secretary of State and the Secretary of the Treasury may reassign any of these functions to other officers, officials, departments, and agencies within the executive branch, consistent with applicable law.Start Printed Page 45152
(c) In performing the function of the President under section 11 of the Act, the Secretary of State shall establish the coordinating committee as part of the Department of State for administrative purposes only, and shall, consistent with applicable law, provide administrative support to the coordinating committee. In the performance of functions assigned by subsection 2(a) of this order or by the Act, the Secretary of State, the Secretary of the Treasury, and the Secretary of Homeland Security shall consult the coordinating committee, as appropriate.
Sec. 3.
Amendments to Related Executive Orders. (a) Section 1 of Executive Order 13194 of January 18, 2001, is revised to read as follows:
“Section 1. Except to the extent provided by section 2 of this order, and notwithstanding the existence of any rights or obligations conferred or imposed by any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date of this order, the importation into, or exportation from, the United States of any rough diamond from Sierra Leone, on or after July 30, 2003, is prohibited.”
(b) Section 2 of Executive Order 13194 is revised to read as follows: “Sec. 2. The prohibitions in section 1 of this order shall not apply to the importation or exportation of any rough diamond that has been controlled through the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme.”
(c) Sections 4(c), (d), and (e) of Executive Order 13194 are deleted, and the word “and” is added after the semicolon at the end of section 4(a).
(d) Section 1 of Executive Order 13213 of May 22, 2001, is revised to read as follows: “Section 1. Notwithstanding the existence of any rights or obligations conferred or imposed by any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date of this order, the direct or indirect importation into the United States of all rough diamonds from Liberia, whether or not such diamonds originated in Liberia, on or after July 30, 2003, is prohibited.”
Sec. 4.
Definitions. For the purposes of this order and Executive Order 13194, the definitions set forth in section 3 of the Act shall apply, and the term “Kimberley Process Certification Scheme” shall not be construed to include any changes to the KPCS after April 25, 2003.
Sec. 5.
General Provisions. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
Sec. 6.
Effective Date and Transmittal. (a) Sections 1 and 3 of this order are effective at 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time on July 30, 2003. The remaining provisions of this order are effective immediately.
(b) This order shall be transmitted to the Congress and published in the Federal Register.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13313 of July 31, 2003
Delegation of Certain Congressional Reporting Functions
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 301 of title 3, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. The functions of the President of submitting certain recurring reports to the Congress are assigned as follows:
(a) The Secretary of State shall submit the following reports:
1. Report on Kosovo Peacekeeping, consistent with section 1213 of Public Law 106-398;
2. Report on Bosnia and U.S. Forces in NATO-Led Stabilization Force (SFOR), consistent with section 7(b) of Public Law 105-174 and section 1203(a) of Public Law 105-261;
3. Report on Partnership for Peace Developments, consistent with section 514 of Public Law 103-236 (22 U.S.C. 1928 note);
4. Report on U.S. Military Personnel and U.S. Civilian Contractors in Colombia, consistent with section 3204(f) of Public Law 106-246;
5. Report on Nuclear Nonproliferation, consistent with section 601(a) of Public Law 95-242, as amended by Public Law 103-236 (22 U.S.C. 3281(a));
6. Report on Resolution of the Cyprus Dispute, consistent with section 620C(c) of Public Law 87-195, as amended by Public Law 95-384 (22 U.S.C. 2373(c));
7. Report on Peacekeeping, consistent with section 4 of Public Law 79-264, as amended (22 U.S.C. 287b);
8. Report on Proposed Refugee Admissions, consistent with section 207(d)(1) of Public Law 96-212 (8 U.S.C. 1157(d)(1));
9. Report on Continued Compliance With the Provisions of the Jackson-Vanik Amendment, consistent with sections 402(b) and 409(b) of Public Law 93-618, as amended (19 U.S.C. 2432(b), 2439(b));
10. Report Regarding Conditions in Burma and U.S. Policy Toward Burma, consistent with section 570(d) of Public Law 104-208;
11. Report on Tibet Negotiations, consistent with section 613(b) of Public Law 107-228 (22 U.S.C. 6901 note);
12. Report on Strategy for Meeting Security Needs of Afghanistan, consistent with section 206(c)(2) of Public Law 107-327 (22 U.S.C. 7536(c)(2));
13. Report on Proliferation of Missiles and Essential Components of Nuclear, Biological, Chemical, and Radiological Weapons, consistent with section 1308(a) of Public Law 107-228 (50 U.S.C. 2368(a));
14. Report on the National Emergency With Respect to Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction, Executive Order 12938, consistent with section 204(c) of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, 50 U.S.C. 1703(c), and section 401(c) of the National Emergencies Act, 50 U.S.C. 1641(c);
15. Report on Adherence to and Compliance With Arms Control Agreements and Nonproliferation Agreements and Commitments, consistent with section 403 of Public Law 87-297, as amended (22 U.S.C. 2593a);Start Printed Page 46074
16. Report on Chemical Weapons Convention Inspections, consistent with section 309 of the Chemical Weapons Convention Implementation Act of 1998 (22 U.S.C. 6728);
17. Report on U.S. Participation in the United Nations, consistent with section 4 of Public Law 79-264, as amended (22 U.S.C. 287b); and
18. Report on Russian Proliferation to Iran and Other Countries of Proliferation Concern, consistent with section 1206 of Public Law 107-314 (22 U.S.C. 5952 note).
(b) The Secretary of the Treasury shall submit the following reports:
1. Report on the National Emergency With Respect to Libya, Executive Order 12543, consistent with section 401(c) of the National Emergencies Act, 50 U.S.C. 1641(c), and section 204(c) of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, 50 U.S.C. 1703(c);
2. Report on the National Emergency With Respect to the Western Balkans, Executive Order 13219, consistent with section 401(c) of the National Emergencies Act, 50 U.S.C. 1641(c), and section 204(c) of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, 50 U.S.C. 1703(c);
3. Report on the National Emergency With Respect to the Risk of Nuclear Proliferation Relating to the Disposition of Highly Enriched Uranium Extracted from Nuclear Weapons of the Government of the Russian Federation, Executive Order 13159, consistent with section 401(c) of the National Emergencies Act, 50 U.S.C. 1641(c), and section 204(c) of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, 50 U.S.C. 1703(c);
4. Report on the National Emergency With Respect to Burma, Executive Order 13047, consistent with section 401(c) of the National Emergencies Act, 50 U.S.C. 1641(c), and section 204(c) of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, 50 U.S.C. 1703(c);
5. Report on the National Emergency With Respect to Middle East Terrorism, Executive Order 12947, consistent with section 401(c) of the National Emergencies Act, 50 U.S.C. 1641(c), and section 204(c) of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, 50 U.S.C. 1703(c);
6. Report on the National Emergency With Respect to the 1979 Iranian Emergency and Assets Blocking, Executive Order 12170, consistent with section 401(c) of the National Emergencies Act, 50 U.S.C. 1641(c), and section 204(c) of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, 50 U.S.C. 1703(c);
7. Report on the National Emergency With Respect to Iranian Petroleum Resources, Executive Order 12957, consistent with section 401(c) of the National Emergencies Act, 50 U.S.C. 1641(c), and section 204(c) of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, 50 U.S.C. 1703(c);
8. Report on the National Emergency With Respect to Significant Narcotics Traffickers Centered in Colombia, Executive Order 12978, consistent with section 401(c) of the National Emergencies Act, 50 U.S.C. 1641(c), and section 204(c) of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, 50 U.S.C. 1703(c);
9. Report on the National Emergency With Respect to Persons Who Commit, Threaten to Commit, or Support Terrorism, Executive Order 13224, consistent with section 401(c) of the National Emergencies Act, 50 U.S.C. 1641(c), and section 204(c) of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, 50 U.S.C. 1703(c);
10. Report on the National Emergency With Respect to Sierra Leone and Liberia, Executive Order 13194, consistent with section 401(c) of the National Emergencies Act, 50 U.S.C. 1641(c), and section 204(c) of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, 50 U.S.C. 1703(c);
11. Report on the National Emergency With Respect to Sudan, Executive Order 13067, consistent with section 401(c) of the National Emergencies Start Printed Page 46075Act, 50 U.S.C. 1641(c), and section 204(c) of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, 50 U.S.C. 1703(c);
12. Report on the National Emergency With Respect to Iraq, Executive Order 12722, consistent with section 401(c) of the National Emergencies Act, 50 U.S.C. 1641(c), and section 204(c) of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, 50 U.S.C. 1703(c);
13. Report on the National Emergency With Respect to the Development Fund for Iraq, Executive Order 13303, consistent with section 401(c) of the National Emergencies Act, 50 U.S.C. 1641(c), and section 204(c) of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, 50 U.S.C. 1703(c);
14. Classified Report on the Status of Sanctions Imposed on Significant Foreign Narcotics Traffickers, consistent with section 804(d) of Public Law 106-120 (21 U.S.C. 1903(d));
15. Report on Telecommunications Payments Made to Cuba Pursuant to Department of the Treasury Specific Licenses, consistent with section 1705(e)(6) of Public Law 102-484, as amended by Public Law 104-114 (22 U.S.C. 6004(e)(6));
16. Report on the National Emergency With Respect to Persons Undermining Democratic Processes or Institutions in Zimbabwe, Executive Order 13288, consistent with section 401(c) of the National Emergencies Act, 50 U.S.C. 1641(c), and section 204(c) of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, 50 U.S.C. 1703(c); and
17. Report on International Debt Relief, consistent with section 1000(a)(5) of Public Law 106-113.
(c) The Secretary of Defense shall submit the following reports:
1. Report on Kosovo Benchmarks, consistent with section 1212(c) of Public Law 106-398; and
2. Report on the National Emergency With Respect to Terrorist Attacks on the United States, Proclamation 7463 of September 14, 2001, consistent with section 401(c) of the National Emergencies Act, 50 U.S.C. 1641(c), and section 204(c) of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, 50 U.S.C. 1703(c).
(d) The Secretary of Commerce shall submit the Report on the National Emergency Caused by the Lapse of the Export Administration Act of 1979, Executive Order 13222, consistent with section 401(c) of the National Emergencies Act, 50 U.S.C. 1641(c), and section 204(c) of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, 50 U.S.C. 1703(c).
(e) The Director of Central Intelligence shall submit the following reports:
1. Report on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage, consistent with section 809(b) of Public Law 103-359 (50 U.S.C. App. 2170(b)); and
2. Reports on Commerce With, and Assistance to, Cuba from Other Foreign Countries, consistent with section 108(a) of Public Law 104-114 (22 U.S.C. 6038(a)).
(f) The Director of National Drug Control Policy shall submit the Report on Support for Plan Colombia, consistent with section 3204(e) of Public Law 106-246.
Sec. 2. Reports to the Congress described in certain Senate resolutions shall be submitted as follows:
(a) The Secretary of State shall submit the following reports:
1. Report on the Inter-American Convention Against Corruption, consistent with the Resolution of Advice and Consent to Ratification of the Inter-American Convention Against Corruption adopted by the Senate on July 27, 2000;
2. Report on Compliance With the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe, consistent with Condition 5(C) of the Resolution of Advice and Start Printed Page 46076Consent to Ratification of the Document Agreed Among the States Parties to the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe of November 19, 1990;
3. Report on Chemical Weapons Convention Compliance, consistent with Condition 10(C) of the Resolution of Advice and Consent to the Chemical Weapons Convention adopted by the Senate on April 24, 1997; and
4. Report on Moscow Treaty Implementation, consistent with section 2(2) of the Resolution of Advice and Consent to Ratification of the Treaty on Strategic Offensive Reductions of May 24, 2002.
(b) The Secretary of Commerce shall submit the Report on the Status of the World Intellectual Property Organization Copyright Treaty and the Performance and Phonograms Treaty, consistent with the Senate's resolution of ratification of October 21, 1998.
(c) The Secretary of Defense shall submit the Report on Moscow Treaty Implementation, consistent with section 2(1) of the Resolution of Advice and Consent to Ratification of the Treaty on Strategic Offensive Reductions of May 24, 2002.
Sec. 3. In carrying out sections 1 and 2 of this order, officers of the United States shall ensure that all actions taken by them are consistent with the President's constitutional authority to: (a) conduct the foreign affairs of the United States; (b) withhold information the disclosure of which could impair the foreign relations, the national security, the deliberative processes of the Executive, or the performance of the Executive's constitutional duties; (c) recommend for congressional consideration such measures as the President may judge necessary and expedient; and (d) supervise the unitary executive branch.
Sec. 4. Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
Sec. 5. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13314 of August 8, 2003
Waiver Under the Trade Act of 1974 With Respect to Turkmenistan
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including subsection 402(c)(2) and (d) of the Trade Act of 1974, as amended (the “Act”) (19 U.S.C. 2432(c)(2) and (d)), and having made the report to the Congress set forth in subsection 402(c)(2), I hereby waive the application of subsections (a) and (b) of section 402 of the Act with respect to Turkmenistan.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 52315
Executive Order 13315 of August 28, 2003
Blocking Property of the Former Iraqi Regime, Its Senior Officials and Their Family Members, and Taking Certain Other Actions
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.), section 5 of the United Nations Participation Act, as amended (22 U.S.C. 287c) (UNPA), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, in view of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1483 of May 22, 2003, and in order to take additional steps with respect to the situation in Iraq,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, hereby expand the scope of the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13303 of May 22, 2003, to address the unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States posed by obstacles to the orderly reconstruction of Iraq, the restoration and maintenance of peace and security in that country, and the development of political, administrative, and economic institutions in Iraq. I find that the removal of Iraqi property from that country by certain senior officials of the former Iraqi regime and their immediate family members constitutes one of these obstacles. I further determine that the United States is engaged in armed hostilities and that it is in the interest of the United States to confiscate certain additional property of the former Iraqi regime, certain senior officials of the former regime, immediate family members of those officials, and controlled entities. I intend that such property, after all right, title, and interest in it has vested in the Department of the Treasury, shall be transferred to the Development Fund for Iraq. Such property shall be used to meet the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people, for the economic reconstruction and repair of Iraq's infrastructure, for the continued disarmament of Iraq, for the costs of Iraqi civilian administration, and for other purposes benefiting the Iraqi people. I determine that such use would be in the interest of and for the benefit of the United States. I hereby order:
Section 1. Except to the extent provided in section 203(b)(1), (3), and (4) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(1), (3), and (4)), or regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date of this order, all property and interests in property of the former Iraqi regime or its state bodies, corporations, or agencies, or of the following persons, that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of United States persons, are blocked and may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in:
(a) the persons listed in the Annex to this order; and
(b) persons determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State,
(i) to be senior officials of the former Iraqi regime or their immediate family members; or
(ii) to be owned or controlled by, or acting or purporting to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any of the persons listed in the Annex to this order or determined to be subject to this order.Start Printed Page 52316
Sec. 2. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is authorized to confiscate property that is blocked pursuant to section 1 of this order and that he determines, in consultation with the Secretary of State, to belong to a person, organization, or country that has planned, authorized, aided, or engaged in armed hostilities against the United States. All right, title, and interest in any property so confiscated shall vest in the Department of the Treasury. Such vested property shall promptly be transferred to the Development Fund for Iraq.
Sec. 3. (a) Any transaction by a United States person or within the United States that evades or avoids, has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
(b) Any conspiracy formed to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
Sec. 4. For purposes of this order:
(a) the term “person” means an individual or entity;
(b) the term “entity” means a partnership, association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization;
(c) the term “United States person” means any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States;
(d) the term “former Iraqi regime” means the Saddam Hussein regime that governed Iraq until on or about May 1, 2003;
(e) the term “coalition authority” means the Coalition Provisional Authority under the direction of its Administrator, and the military forces of the United States, the United Kingdom, and their coalition partners present in Iraq under the command or operational control of the Commander of United States Central Command; and
(f) the term “Development Fund for Iraq” means the fund established on or about May 22, 2003, on the books of the Central Bank of Iraq, by the Administrator of the Coalition Provisional Authority responsible for the temporary governance of Iraq and all accounts held for the fund or for the Central Bank of Iraq in the name of the fund.
Sec. 5. I hereby determine that the making of donations of the type specified in section 203(b)(2) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)) by or to persons determined to be subject to the sanctions imposed under this order would seriously impair my ability to deal with the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13303 and expanded in scope in this order and would endanger Armed Forces of the United States that are engaged in hostilities, and I hereby prohibit such donations as provided by section 1 of this order.
Sec. 6. For those persons listed in the Annex to this order or determined to be subject to this order who might have a constitutional presence in the United States, I find that because of the ability to transfer funds or other assets instantaneously, prior notice to such persons of measures to be taken pursuant to this order would render these measures ineffectual. I therefore determine that for these measures to be effective in addressing the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13303 and expanded in scope in this order, there need be no prior notice of a listing or determination made pursuant to section 1 of this order.
Sec. 7. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA and UNPA as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government, consistent with applicable law. All agencies of the United States Government Start Printed Page 52317are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order.
Sec. 8. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is authorized to determine, subsequent to the issuance of this order, that circumstances no longer warrant inclusion of a person in the Annex to this order and that such person is therefore no longer covered within the scope of the order.
Sec. 9. Nothing in this order is intended to affect the continued effectiveness of any rules, regulations, orders, licenses, or other forms of administrative action issued, taken, or continued in effect heretofore or hereafter under 31 C.F.R. chapter V, except as expressly terminated, modified, or suspended by or pursuant to this order.
Sec. 10. This order shall not apply to such property as is or may come under the control of the coalition authority in Iraq. Nothing in this order is intended to affect dispositions of such property or other determinations by the coalition authority.
Sec. 11. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, officers or employees, or any other person.
Sec. 12. This order is effective on 12:01 a.m. EDT on August 29, 2003.
Sec. 13. This order shall be transmitted to the Congress and published in the Federal Register.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
August 28, 2003.
Start Printed Page 52318
Start Printed Page 52319
Start Printed Page 52320
Start Printed Page 52321
Start Printed Page 52322
Start Printed Page 55255
Executive Order 13316 of September 17, 2003
Continuance of Certain Federal Advisory Committees
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in accordance with the provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.), it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Each advisory committee listed below is continued until September 30, 2005.
(a) Committee for the Preservation of the White House; Executive Order 11145, as amended (Department of the Interior).
(b) National Infrastructure Advisory Council; Section 3 of Executive Order 13231, as amended (Department of Homeland Security).
(c) Federal Advisory Council on Occupational Safety and Health; Executive Order 12196, as amended (Department of Labor).
(d) President's Board of Advisors on Historically Black Colleges and Universities; Executive Order 13256 (Department of Education).
(e) President's Board of Advisors on Tribal Colleges and Universities; Executive Order 13270 (Department of Education).
(f) President's Commission on White House Fellowships; Executive Order 11183, as amended (Office of Personnel Management).
(g) President's Committee on the Arts and the Humanities; Executive Order 12367, as amended (National Endowment for the Arts).
(h) President's Committee on the International Labor Organization; Executive Order 12216, as amended (Department of Labor).
(i) President's Committee on the National Medal of Science; Executive Order 11287, as amended (National Science Foundation).
(j) President's Council on Bioethics; Executive Order 13237 (Department of Health and Human Services).
(k) President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports; Executive Order 13265 (Department of Health and Human Services).
(l) President's Export Council; Executive Order 12131, as amended (Department of Commerce).
(m) President's National Security Telecommunications Advisory Committee; Executive Order 12382, as amended (Department of Homeland Security).
(n) Trade and Environment Policy Advisory Committee; Executive Order 12905 (Office of the United States Trade Representative).
Sec. 2. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other Executive Order, the functions of the President under the Federal Advisory Committee Act that are applicable to the committees listed in section 1 of this order shall be performed by the head of the department or agency designated after each committee, in accordance with the guidelines and procedures established by the Administrator of General Services.
Sec. 3. The following Executive Orders, or sections thereof, which established committees that have terminated or whose work is completed, are revoked:
(a) Sections 5 through 7 of Executive Order 13111, as amended by Executive Order 13188 and Section 3(a) of Executive Order 13218, pertaining to the Start Printed Page 55256establishment of the Advisory Committee on Expanding Training Opportunities;
(b) Executive Order 12975, as amended by Executive Orders 13018, 13046, and 13137, establishing the National Bioethics Advisory Commission;
(c) Executive Order 13227, as amended by Executive Order 13255, establishing the President's Commission on Excellence in Special Education;
(d) Executive Order 13278, establishing the President's Commission on the United States Postal Service;
(e) Executive Order 13210, establishing the President's Commission to Strengthen Social Security;
(f) Sections 5 through 8 of Executive Order 13177, pertaining to the establishment of the President's Council on the Use of Offsets in Commercial Trade;
(g) Executive Order 13263, establishing the President's New Freedom Commission on Mental Health;
(h) Executive Order 13214, establishing the President's Task Force to Improve Health Care Delivery for Our Nation's Veterans; and
(i) Executive Order 13147, as amended by Executive Order 13167, establishing the White House Commission on Complementary and Alternative Medicine Policy.
Sec. 4. Executive Order 13225 is superseded.
Sec. 5. Section 1-102(a) of Executive Order 12131, as amended, is further amended to read as follows:
“(a) The heads of the following executive agencies or their representatives:
(1) Department of State.
(2) Department of the Treasury.
(3) Department of Agriculture.
(4) Department of Commerce.
(5) Department of Labor.
(6) Department of Energy.
(7) Department of Homeland Security.
(8) Office of the United States Trade Representative.
(9) Export-Import Bank of the United States.
(10) Small Business Administration.”
Sec. 6. This order shall be effective September 30, 2003.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 56515
Executive Order 13317 of September 25, 2003
Volunteers for Prosperity
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to encourage volunteer service by highly skilled Americans to support major initiatives by the United States for promoting health and prosperity around the world, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. (a) Policy. A part of USA Freedom Corps, “Volunteers for Prosperity” is a call to service to support major U.S. initiatives that promote health and prosperity around the world. Deploying highly skilled volunteers abroad is an efficient way to use our resources consistent with the objectives of the United States Government's global prosperity agenda. United States volunteers will help to achieve the objectives of the global prosperity agenda, including providing clean water to the poor, promoting democratic governance, developing economic freedom, promoting free and open markets, and stemming the spread of HIV/AIDS.
The investment of Federal resources to enable U.S. volunteers to work with nongovernmental and voluntary service organizations overseas is a preferred use of our resources and also will help leverage private sector resources. United States citizens who are skilled professionals and who volunteer, when matched with organizations working on specific U.S. prosperity initiatives overseas, can provide invaluable support for these initiatives and will supplement and complement the traditions and accomplishments of the Peace Corps.
United States prosperity initiatives that can benefit from volunteer service include, but are not limited to, the Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, the Digital Freedom Initiative, the Water for the Poor Initiative, the Trade for African Development and Enterprise Initiative, and the Middle East Partnership Initiative.
Volunteer service in support of other initiatives, consistent with U.S. foreign policy, shall be considered as well.
(b) Applicability. The following agencies are subject to the requirements of this order: the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), the Department of State, the Department of Commerce, the Department of Health and Human Services, and such other Federal agencies as the President may designate in the future.
Sec. 2.
Establishment. (a) Agencies subject to this order shall each establish within their respective organizations an Office for Volunteers for Prosperity (Office) or, as appropriate, an operating unit within an office.
(b) Each agency subject to this order shall provide its Office or unit with appropriate staff, administrative support, and resources to meet its responsibilities under this order.
(c) Each of these Offices or units shall begin operations no later than 30 days from the date of this order.
(d) Agencies subject to this order shall consider, in evaluating grant applications for assistance activities to be implemented abroad, the applicant's use of highly skilled U.S. volunteers to support U.S. prosperity objectives and initiatives.
Sec. 3.
Purpose.
To the extent permitted by law, the purpose of the Offices will be to promote, expand, and enhance well-defined volunteer service Start Printed Page 56516opportunities for highly skilled U.S. professionals who wish to work with nongovernmental and voluntary service organizations around the world in support of major U.S. prosperity initiatives as identified in section 1 of this order. Such promotion, expansion, and enhancement would include actively participating in the design and selection processes for grants within their agencies, tracking the use of U.S. private volunteer organizations by their agencies, and coordinating with White House Offices including the USA Freedom Corps, the Office of National AIDS Policy, and the Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives, as appropriate.
Sec. 4.
Funding.
Agencies subject to this order are hereby directed to use their best efforts to use funds available for the U.S. prosperity initiatives listed in section 1 of this order to provide appropriate support to organizations that use highly skilled U.S. volunteers to accomplish the objectives identified in those initiatives.
Sec. 5.
Coordination.
The USAID shall serve as the inter-agency coordinator for the Volunteers for Prosperity initiative. In that capacity, the USAID shall coordinate the activities that fall within the scope of the initiative and report on the progress of the initiative to the USA Freedom Corps Office, within the White House Office. The reports shall be submitted within 180 days after the date of this order and annually thereafter. The USA Freedom Corps Council shall encourage consistency in policies and practices within the agencies subject to this order, as appropriate, for purposes related to the Volunteers for Prosperity initiative.
Sec. 6.
Administration.
The actions directed by this order shall be carried out subject to the availability of appropriations, to the extent permitted by law, and consistent with the agencies' missions.
Sec. 7.
Judicial Review.
This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch of the Federal Government, and it is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, against the United States, its departments, agencies, or other entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 66317
Executive Order 13318 of November 21, 2003
Presidential Management Fellows Program
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including sections 3301 and 3302 of title 5, United States Code, and in order to provide for the recruitment and selection of outstanding employees for service in public sector management, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. There is hereby constituted the Presidential Management Fellows Program. The purpose of the Program is to attract to the Federal service outstanding men and women from a variety of academic disciplines and career paths who have a clear interest in, and commitment to, excellence in the leadership and management of public policies and programs. Individuals selected for the Program shall be known as Presidential Management Fellows (PMFs) or Senior Presidential Management Fellows (Senior PMFs).
Sec. 2. (a) Individuals eligible for appointment as a PMF under this order are those who, in pursuing a course of study at the graduate level, have demonstrated both exceptional ability and the commitment to which section 1 refers. Such individuals at the time of application must have received, or must expect to receive soon thereafter, an appropriate advanced degree as defined by the Director of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM).
(b) Individuals eligible for appointment as a Senior PMF under this order are those who have, through extensive work experience, demonstrated both exceptional leadership or analytical ability and the commitment to which section 1 refers.
Sec. 3. The Director of OPM shall prescribe appropriate merit-based rules for the recruitment, nomination, assessment, selection, appointment, placement, and continuing career development of fellows, including rules that:
(a) reserve to the head of a department or agency or component within the Executive Office of the President (EOP) the authority to appoint a fellow who is to be employed in that department, agency, or component;
(b) provide for nomination by universities and colleges, through competitive selection processes, of eligible individuals for consideration for appointment as PMFs;
(c) carry out the policy of the United States to ensure equal employment opportunities for employees without discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin; and
(d) ensure the application of appropriate veterans' preference criteria.
Sec. 4. (a) Fellows shall be appointed to positions in either:
(1) Schedule A of the excepted service; or
(2) an agency or component within the EOP excepted from the competitive service.
(b) Appointments under subsection (a) shall not exceed 2 years in duration unless extended by the head of the department or agency or component within the EOP, with the concurrence of the Director of OPM, for a period not to exceed 1 additional year.
(c) The following principles and policies shall govern service and tenure by fellows:
(1) responsibilities assigned to a PMF shall be consistent with the PMF's educational background and career interests, and the purposes of the Program; Start Printed Page 66318and responsibilities assigned to a Senior PMF shall be consistent with the Senior PMF's experience and career interests, and the purposes of the Program;
(2) continuation of a fellow's appointment shall be contingent upon satisfactory performance by the fellow throughout the fellowship appointment;
(3) except as provided in paragraph (4) of this subsection, service as a fellow shall confer no right to further Federal employment in either the competitive or excepted service upon the expiration of the fellow's appointment; and
(4) competitive civil service status may be granted to a fellow who satisfactorily completes the Program and meets such other requirements as the Director of OPM may prescribe. A fellow appointed by an agency excepted from the competitive service may also be appointed to a permanent position in an excepted service agency without further competition.
Sec. 5. The Director of OPM shall provide for an orderly transition, including with respect to nominations, selection processes, and appointments, from the Presidential Management Intern Program established by Executive Order 12364 of May 24, 1982, to the Presidential Management Fellows Program established by this order. Until that transition is provided for, individuals who were selected or appointed under the provisions of Executive Order 12364 and who have not completed their scheduled periods of excepted service are hereby redesignated as Presidential Management Fellows, and continue their internships under the terms of Executive Order 12364.
Sec. 6. The Director of OPM shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order.
Sec. 7. Executive Order 12364 is superseded, except as provided in section 5 of this order.
Sec. 8. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13319 of December 3, 2003
Amendment to Executive Order 13183, Establishment of the President's Task Force on Puerto Rico's Status
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered that Executive Order 13183 of December 23, 2000, as amended, is further amended as follows:
(1) Section 2 is amended by deleting the second and third sentences, and inserting in lieu thereof the following: “It shall be composed of designees of each member of the President's Cabinet and the Deputy Assistant to the President and Director for Intergovernmental Affairs. The Task Force shall be co-chaired by the Attorney General's designee and the Deputy Assistant to the President and Director for Intergovernmental Affairs.”
(2) By deleting section 4, and inserting in lieu thereof the following: “Sec. 4.
Report. The Task Force shall report on its actions to the President as needed, but no less frequently than once every 2 years, on progress made in the determination of Puerto Rico's ultimate status.”
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13320 of December 9, 2003
Closing of Executive Departments and Agencies of the
Federal Government on Friday, December 26, 2003
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. All executive branch departments and agencies of the Federal Government shall be closed and their employees excused from duty on Friday, December 26, 2003, the day after Christmas Day, except as provided in section 2 below.
Sec. 2. The heads of executive branch departments and agencies may determine that certain offices and installations of their organizations, or parts thereof, must remain open and that certain employees must report for duty on December 26, 2003, for reasons of national security or defense or other public need.
Sec. 3. Friday, December 26, 2003, shall be considered as falling within the scope of Executive Order 11582 of February 11, 1971, and of 5 U.S.C. 5546 and 6103(b) and other similar statutes insofar as they relate to the pay and leave of employees of the United States.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 74465
Executive Order 13321 of December 17, 2003
Appointments During National Emergency
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and in order to further respond to the national emergency I declared in Proclamation 7463 of September 14, 2001, I hereby order as follows:
Section 1.
Emergency Appointments Authority. The emergency appointments authority at section 603 of title 10, United States Code, is invoked and made available to the Secretary of Defense in accordance with the terms of that statute and of Executive Order 12396 of December 9, 1982.
Sec. 2.
Judicial Review. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees or agents, or any person.
Sec. 3.
Administration. This order shall be transmitted to the Congress and published in the Federal Register.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 231
Executive Order 13322 of December 30, 2003
Adjustments of Certain Rates of Pay
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the laws cited herein, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Statutory Pay Systems. The rates of basic pay or salaries of the statutory pay systems (as defined in 5 U.S.C. 5302(1)), as adjusted under 5 U.S.C. 5303(b), are set forth on the schedules attached hereto and made a part hereof:
(a) The General Schedule (5 U.S.C. 5332(a)) at Schedule 1;
(b) The Foreign Service Schedule (22 U.S.C. 3963) at Schedule 2; and
(c) The schedules for the Veterans Health Administration of the Department of Veterans Affairs (38 U.S.C. 7306, 7404; section 301(a) of Public Law 102-40) at Schedule 3.
Sec. 2.
Senior Executive Service. The ranges of rates of basic pay for senior executives in the Senior Executive Service, as established pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 5382, as amended by section 1125 of Public Law 108-136, are set forth on Schedule 4 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 3.
Executive and Certain Other Salaries. The rates of basic pay or salaries for the following offices and positions are set forth on the schedules attached hereto and made a part hereof:
(a) The Executive Schedule (5 U.S.C. 5311-5318) at Schedule 5;
(b) The Vice President (3 U.S.C. 104) and the Congress (2 U.S.C. 31) at Schedule 6; and
(c) Justices and judges (28 U.S.C. 5, 44(d), 135, 252, and 461(a), section 140 of Public Law 97-92, and Public Law 108-167) at Schedule 7.
Sec. 4.
Uniformed Services. Pursuant to section 601(a)-(b) of Public Law 108-136, the rates of monthly basic pay (37 U.S.C. 203) for members of the uniformed services, as adjusted under 37 U.S.C. 1009, and the rate of monthly cadet or midshipman pay are set forth on Schedule 8 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 5.
Locality-Based Comparability Payments.
(a) Pursuant to sections 5304 and 5304a of title 5, United States Code, locality-based comparability payments shall be paid in accordance with Schedule 9 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
(b) The Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall take such actions as may be necessary to implement these payments and to publish appropriate notice of such payments in the Federal Register.
Sec. 6.
Administrative Law Judges. The rates of basic pay for administrative law judges, as adjusted under 5 U.S.C. 5372(b)(4), are set forth on Schedule 10 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 7.
Effective Dates. Schedule 8 is effective on January 1, 2004. The other schedules contained herein are effective on the first day of the first applicable pay period beginning on or after January 1, 2004.Start Printed Page 232
Sec. 8.
Prior Order Superseded. Executive Order 13282 of December 31, 2002, as amended by Executive Order 13291 of March 21, 2003, is superseded.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
December 30, 2003.
Start Printed Page 233
Start Printed Page 234
Start Printed Page 235
Start Printed Page 236
Start Printed Page 237
Start Printed Page 238
Start Printed Page 239
Start Printed Page 240
Start Printed Page 241
Executive Order 13323 of December 30, 2003
Assignment of Functions Relating to Arrivals in and Departures From the United States
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 215 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA), as amended (8 U.S.C. 1185), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and to strengthen the national security of the United States through procedures and systems to manage and control the arrival and departure of persons from the United States, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Functions of the Secretary of Homeland Security. The Secretary of Homeland Security is assigned the functions of the President under section 215(a) of the INA with respect to persons other than citizens of the United States. In exercising these functions, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall not issue, amend, or revoke any rules, regulations, or orders without first obtaining the concurrence of the Secretary of State.
Sec. 2.
Functions of the Secretary of State. The Secretary of State is assigned the functions of the President under section 215(a) and (b) of the INA with respect to citizens of the United States, including those functions concerning United States passports. In addition, the Secretary may amend or revoke part 46 of title 22, Code of Federal Regulations, which concern persons other than citizens of the United States. In exercising these functions, the Secretary of State shall not issue, amend, or revoke any rules, regulations, or orders without first consulting with the Secretary of Homeland Security.
Sec. 3.
Judicial Review. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 2823
Executive Order 13324 of January 15, 2004
Termination of Emergency With Respect to Sierra Leone and Liberia
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) (NEA), and section 5 of the United Nations Participation Act of 1945, as amended (22 U.S.C. 287c),
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, find that the situations that gave rise to the declaration of a national emergency in Executive Order 13194 of January 18, 2001, with respect to Sierra Leone and the expansion of the scope of that emergency in Executive Order 13213 of May 22, 2001, with respect to Liberia, have been significantly altered given that in January 2002 the Government of Sierra Leone, the Sierra Leonean rebel group Revolutionary United Front (RUF), and the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone declared the war in Sierra Leone to have ended; the parties to the Liberian civil war entered into a Comprehensive Peace Agreement in August 2003; the RUF no longer exists as a military organization; Charles Taylor, who was the prime instigator of violence both in Sierra Leone and in Liberia, has resigned from the Liberian presidency and gone into exile; the Government of Sierra Leone has established a rough diamond certification regime that meets the minimum standards of the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme; and the United States has implemented the Clean Diamond Trade Act (Public Law 108-19), prohibiting the importation into the United States of rough diamonds that are not controlled through the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, currently including rough diamonds from Liberia. Accordingly, I hereby terminate the national emergency declared and expanded in scope in those two prior orders, revoke those orders, and further order:
Section 1. Pursuant to section 202 of the NEA (50 U.S.C. 1622), termination of the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13194 and expanded in scope in Executive Order 13213 shall not affect any action taken or proceeding pending not finally concluded or determined as of the effective date of this order, or any action or proceeding based on any act committed prior to such date, or any rights or duties that matured or penalties that were incurred prior to such date.
Sec. 2. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.Start Printed Page 2824
Sec. 3. This order is effective at 12:01 a.m. eastern standard time on January 16, 2004. This order shall be transmitted to the Congress and published in the Federal Register.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13325 of January 23, 2004
Amendment to Executive Order 12293, the Foreign Service of the United States
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Foreign Service Act of 1980, as amended, and in order to adjust the basic salary rates for each class of the Senior Foreign Service in light of the changes made to the manner in which members of the Senior Executive Service will be paid pursuant to the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2004 (Public Law 108-136), it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Section 4 of Executive Order 12293 of February 23, 1981, as amended, is amended to read as follows:
“Sec. 4. (a) In accord with Section 402 of the Act (22 U.S.C. 3962), there are established the following salary classes with titles for the Senior Foreign Service, at the following ranges of basic rates of pay.
(1)
Career Minister
Range from 94 percent of the rate payable to level III of the Executive Schedule to 100 percent of the rate payable to level III of the Executive Schedule.
(2)
Minister-Counselor
Range from 90 percent of the rate payable to level III of the Executive Schedule to 100 percent of the rate payable to level III of the Executive Schedule.
(3)
Counselor
Range from 120 percent of the rate payable to GS-15/Step 1 to 100 percent of rate payable to level III of the Executive Schedule.
(b) Upon conversion to a rate of basic pay within the range of rates established for the applicable salary class by this section as of the first day of the first applicable pay period beginning on or after January 1, 2004, a member of the Senior Foreign Service shall receive the rate of basic pay to which he or she was entitled immediately before that date, including any locality-based comparability payment authorized under 5 U.S.C. 5304(h)(2)(C) that the member was receiving immediately before that date. On the same date, or on a later date specified by the Secretary of State (or the heads of the other agencies that utilize the Foreign Service personnel system (collectively the “Secretary”)), the Secretary may increase the member's rate of basic pay upon a determination that the member's performance or contribution to the mission of the agency so warrant and that the member is otherwise eligible for such a pay adjustment under Section 402 of the Foreign Service Act.”Start Printed Page 4218
Sec. 2.
Effective Date. The salary rates contained herein are effective on the first day of the first applicable pay period beginning on or after January 1, 2004.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13326 of January 27, 2004
President's Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to obtain recommendations concerning implementation of the new vision for space exploration activities of the United States, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment. There is hereby established the President's Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy (the “Commission”).
Sec. 2.
Membership.
(a) The Commission shall be composed of not more than nine members appointed by the President, taking into account as appropriate the experience of such individuals with respect to governmental, scientific, and technical matters relating to space.
(b) The President shall designate one member of the Commission to serve as Chairman of the Commission.
Sec. 3.
Mission.
(a) The mission of the Commission shall be to provide recommendations to the President, in accordance with this order, on implementation of the vision outlined in the President's policy statement entitled “A Renewed Spirit of Discovery” and the President's Budget Submission for Fiscal Year 2005 (collectively, “Policy”).
(b) The Commission shall examine and make recommendations to the President regarding:
(i) A science research agenda to be conducted on the Moon and other destinations as well as human and robotic science activities that advance our capacity to achieve the Policy;
(ii) The exploration of technologies, demonstrations, and strategies, including the use of lunar and other in situ natural resources, that could be used for sustainable human and robotic exploration;
(iii) Criteria that could be used to select future destinations for human exploration;
(iv) Long-term organization options for managing implementation of space exploration activities;
(v) The most appropriate and effective roles for potential private sector and international participants in implementing the Policy;
(vi) Methods for optimizing space exploration activities to encourage the interest of America's youth in studying and pursuing careers in mathematics, science, and engineering; and
(vii) Management of the implementation of the Policy within available resources.
Sec. 4.
Administration.
(a) The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) shall provide, to the extent permitted by law, administrative support and funding for the Commission. The Commission is established in NASA for administrative purposes only.
(b) Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation for their work on the Commission. Members appointed from among private citizens of the United States, however, while engaged in the work of the Commission, may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu Start Printed Page 5256of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in Government service (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707), to the extent funds are available.
(c) Insofar as the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App. 2) (the “Act”), as amended, may apply to the Commission, any functions of the President under that Act, except for those in section 6 of that Act, shall be performed by the Administrator of NASA (the “Administrator”), in accordance with the guidelines that have been issued by the Administrator of General Services.
(d) The Commission shall conduct occasional meetings as appropriate, including at various locations throughout the United States, to solicit views and opinions from the public, academia, and industry.
(e) The Commission shall not have access to information classified pursuant to Executive Order 12958 of April 17, 1995, as amended.
Sec. 5.
Report.
The Commission shall submit its final report to the President through the Administrator within 120 days of the first meeting of the Commission.
Sec. 6.
General Provisions. (a) This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and it is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
(b) The Commission shall terminate within 60 days after submitting its final report.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13327 of February 4, 2004
Federal Real Property Asset Management
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 121(a) of title 40, United States Code, and in order to promote the efficient and economical use of Federal real property resources in accordance with their value as national assets and in the best interests of the Nation, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. It is the policy of the United States to promote the efficient and economical use of America's real property assets and to assure management accountability for implementing Federal real property management reforms. Based on this policy, executive branch departments and agencies shall recognize the importance of real property resources through increased management attention, the establishment of clear goals and objectives, improved policies and levels of accountability, and other appropriate action.
Sec. 2.
Definition and Scope. (a) For the purpose of this executive order, Federal real property is defined as any real property owned, leased, or otherwise managed by the Federal Government, both within and outside the United States, and improvements on Federal lands. For the purpose of this order, Federal real property shall exclude: interests in real property assets that have been disposed of for public benefit purposes pursuant to section 484 of title 40, United States Code, and are now held in private ownership; land easements or rights-of-way held by the Federal Government; public domain land (including lands withdrawn for military purposes) or land reserved or dedicated for national forest, national park, or national wildlife refuge purposes except for improvements on those lands; land held in trust or restricted fee status for individual Indians or Indian tribes; and land and interests in land that are withheld from the scope of this order by agency heads for reasons of national security, foreign policy, or public safety.
(b) This order shall not be interpreted to supersede any existing authority under law or by executive order for real property asset management, with the exception of the revocation of Executive Order 12512 of April 29, 1985, in section 8 of this order.
Sec. 3.
Establishment and Responsibilities of Agency Senior Real Property Officer. (a) The heads of all executive branch departments and agencies cited in sections 901(b)(1) and (b)(2) of title 31, United States Code, and the Secretary of Homeland Security, shall designate among their senior management officials, a Senior Real Property Officer. Such officer shall have the education, training, and experience required to administer the necessary functions of the position for the particular agency.
(b) The Senior Real Property Officer shall develop and implement an agency asset management planning process that meets the form, content, and other requirements established by the Federal Real Property Council established in section 4 of this order. The initial agency asset management plan will be submitted to the Office of Management and Budget on a date determined by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget. In developing this plan, the Senior Real Property Officer shall:Start Printed Page 5898
(i)
identify and categorize all real property owned, leased, or otherwise managed by the agency, including, where applicable, those properties outside the United States in which the lease agreements and arrangements reflect the host country currency or involve alternative lease plans or rental agreements;
(ii)
prioritize actions to be taken to improve the operational and financial management of the agency's real property inventory;
(iii)
make life-cycle cost estimations associated with the prioritized actions;
(iv)
identify legislative authorities that are required to address these priorities;
(v)
identify and pursue goals, with appropriate deadlines, consistent with and supportive of the agency's asset management plan and measure progress against such goals;
(vi)
incorporate planning and management requirements for historic property under Executive Order 13287 of March 3, 2003, and for environmental management under Executive Order 13148 of April 21, 2000; and
(vii)
identify any other information and pursue any other actions necessary to the appropriate development and implementation of the agency asset management plan.
(c) The Senior Real Property Officer shall be responsible, on an ongoing basis, for monitoring the real property assets of the agency so that agency assets are managed in a manner that is:
(i)
consistent with, and supportive of, the goals and objectives set forth in the agency's overall strategic plan under section 306 of title 5, United States Code;
(ii)
consistent with the real property asset management principles developed by the Federal Real Property Council established in section 4 of this order; and
(iii)
reflected in the agency asset management plan.
(d) The Senior Real Property Officer shall, on an annual basis, provide to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and the Administrator of General Services:
(i)
information that lists and describes real property assets under the jurisdiction, custody, or control of that agency, except for classified information; and
(ii)
any other relevant information the Director of the Office of Management and Budget or the Administrator of General Services may request for inclusion in the Government-wide listing of all Federal real property assets and leased property.
(e) The designation of the Senior Real Property Officer shall be made by agencies within 30 days after the date of this order.
Sec. 4.
Establishment of a Federal Real Property Council. (a) A Federal Real Property Council (Council) is established, within the Office of Management and Budget for administrative purposes, to develop guidance for, and facilitate the success of, each agency's asset management plan. The Council shall be composed exclusively of all agency Senior Real Property Officers, the Controller of the Office of Management and Budget, the Administrator of General Services, and any other full-time or permanent part-time Federal officials or employees as deemed necessary by the Chairman of the Council. The Deputy Director for Management of the Office of Management and Budget shall also be a member and shall chair the Council. The Office of Management and Budget shall provide funding and administrative support for the Council, as appropriate.
(b) The Council shall provide a venue for assisting the Senior Real Property Officers in the development and implementation of the agency asset management plans. The Council shall work with the Administrator of General Services to establish appropriate performance measures to determine the effectiveness of Federal real property management. Such performance measures shall include, but are not limited to, evaluating the costs and benefits Start Printed Page 5899involved with acquiring, repairing, maintaining, operating, managing, and disposing of Federal real properties at particular agencies. Specifically, the Council shall consider, as appropriate, the following performance measures:
(i)
life-cycle cost estimations associated with the agency's prioritized actions;
(ii)
the costs relating to the acquisition of real property assets by purchase, condemnation, exchange, lease, or otherwise;
(iii)
the cost and time required to dispose of Federal real property assets and the financial recovery of the Federal investment resulting from the disposal;
(iv)
the operating, maintenance, and security costs at Federal properties, including but not limited to the costs of utility services at unoccupied properties;
(v)
the environmental costs associated with ownership of property, including the costs of environmental restoration and compliance activities;
(vi)
changes in the amounts of vacant Federal space;
(vii)
the realization of equity value in Federal real property assets;
(viii)
opportunities for cooperative arrangements with the commercial real estate community; and
(ix)
the enhancement of Federal agency productivity through an improved working environment. The performance measures shall be designed to enable the heads of executive branch agencies to track progress in the achievement of Government-wide property management objectives, as well as allow for comparing the performance of executive branch agencies against industry and other public sector agencies.
(c) The Council shall serve as a clearinghouse for executive agencies for best practices in evaluating actual progress in the implementation of real property enhancements. The Council shall also work in conjunction with the President's Management Council to assist the efforts of the Senior Real Property Officials and the implementation of agency asset management plans.
(d) The Council shall be organized and hold its first meeting within 60 days of the date of this order. The Council shall hold meetings not less often than once a quarter each fiscal year.
Sec. 5.
Role of the General Services Administration. (a) The Administrator of General Services shall, to the extent permitted by law and in consultation with the Federal Real Property Council, provide policy oversight and guidance for executive agencies for Federal real property management; manage selected properties for an agency at the request of that agency and with the consent of the Administrator; delegate operational responsibilities to an agency where the Administrator determines it will promote efficiency and economy, and where the receiving agency has demonstrated the ability and willingness to assume such responsibilities; and provide necessary leadership in the development and maintenance of needed property management information systems.
(b) The Administrator of General Services shall publish common performance measures and standards adopted by the Council.
(c) The Administrator of General Services, in consultation with the Federal Real Property Council, shall establish and maintain a single, comprehensive, and descriptive database of all real property under the custody and control of all executive branch agencies, except when otherwise required for reasons of national security. The Administrator shall collect from each executive branch agency such descriptive information, except for classified information, as the Administrator considers will best describe the nature, use, and extent of the real property holdings of the Federal Government.
(d) The Administrator of General Services, in consultation with the Federal Real Property Council, may establish data and other information technology (IT) standards for use by Federal agencies in developing or upgrading Federal Start Printed Page 5900agency real property information systems in order to facilitate reporting on a uniform basis. Those agencies with particular IT standards and systems in place and in use shall be allowed to continue with such use to the extent that they are compatible with the standards issued by the Administrator.
Sec. 6.
General Provisions. (a) The Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall review, through the management and budget review processes, the efforts of departments and agencies in implementing their asset management plans and achieving the Government-wide property management policies established pursuant to this order.
(b) The Office of Management and Budget and the General Services Administration shall, in consultation with the landholding agencies, develop legislative initiatives that seek to improve Federal real property management through the adoption of appropriate industry management techniques and the establishment of managerial accountability for implementing effective and efficient real property management practices.
(c) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the authority of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget with respect to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(d) Nothing in this order shall be construed to affect real property for the use of the President, Vice President, or, for protective purposes, the United States Secret Service.
Sec. 7.
Public Lands. In order to ensure that Federally owned lands, other than the real property covered by this order, are managed in the most effective and economic manner, the Departments of Agriculture and the Interior shall take such steps as are appropriate to improve their management of public lands and National Forest System lands and shall develop appropriate legislative proposals necessary to facilitate that result.
Sec. 8. Executive Order 12512 of April 29, 1985, is hereby revoked.
Sec. 9.
Judicial Review. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, against the United States, its departments, agencies, or other entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13328 of February 6, 2004
Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the United States Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment. There is established, within the Executive Office of the President for administrative purposes, a Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the United States Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction (Commission).
Sec. 2.
Mission. (a) The Commission is established for the purpose of advising the President in the discharge of his constitutional authority under Article II of the Constitution to conduct foreign relations, protect national security, and command the Armed Forces of the United States, in order to ensure the most effective counterproliferation capabilities of the United States and response to the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks and the ongoing threat of terrorist activity. The Commission shall assess whether the Intelligence Community is sufficiently authorized, organized, equipped, trained, and resourced to identify and warn in a timely manner of, and to support United States Government efforts to respond to, the development and transfer of knowledge, expertise, technologies, materials, and resources associated with the proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction, related means of delivery, and other related threats of the 21st Century and their employment by foreign powers (including terrorists, terrorist organizations, and private networks, or other entities or individuals). In doing so, the Commission shall examine the capabilities and challenges of the Intelligence Community to collect, process, analyze, produce, and disseminate information concerning the capabilities, intentions, and activities of such foreign powers relating to the design, development, manufacture, acquisition, possession, proliferation, transfer, testing, potential or threatened use, or use of Weapons of Mass Destruction, related means of delivery, and other related threats of the 21st Century.
(b) With respect to that portion of its examination under paragraph 2(a) of this order that relates to Iraq, the Commission shall specifically examine the Intelligence Community's intelligence prior to the initiation of Operation Iraqi Freedom and compare it with the findings of the Iraq Survey Group and other relevant agencies or organizations concerning the capabilities, intentions, and activities of Iraq relating to the design, development, manufacture, acquisition, possession, proliferation, transfer, testing, potential or threatened use, or use of Weapons of Mass Destruction and related means of delivery.
(c) With respect to its examination under paragraph 2(a) of this order, the Commission shall:
(i)
specifically evaluate the challenges of obtaining information regarding the design, development, manufacture, acquisition, possession, proliferation, transfer, testing, potential or threatened use, or use of Weapons of Mass Destruction, related means of delivery, and other related threats of the 21st Century in closed societies; andStart Printed Page 6902
(ii)
compare the Intelligence Community's intelligence concerning Weapons of Mass Destruction programs and other related threats of the 21st Century in Libya prior to Libya's recent decision to open its programs to inter national scrutiny and in Afghanistan prior to removal of the Taliban government with the current assessments of organizations examining those programs.
(d) The Commission shall submit to the President by March 31, 2005, a report of the findings of the Commission resulting from its examination and its specific recommendations for ensuring that the Intelligence Community of the United States is sufficiently authorized, organized, equipped, trained, and resourced to identify and warn in a timely manner of, and to support United States Government efforts to respond to, the development and transfer of knowledge, expertise, technologies, materials, and resources associated with the proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction, related means of delivery, and other related threats of the 21st Century and their employment by foreign powers (including terrorists, terrorist organizations, and private networks, or other entities or individuals). The Central Intelligence Agency and other components of the Intelligence Community shall utilize the Commission and its resulting report. Within 90 days of receiving the Commission's report, the President will consult with the Congress concerning the Commission's report and recommendations, and will propose any appropriate legislative recommendations arising out of the findings of the Commission.
Sec. 3.
Membership. The Commission shall consist of up to nine members appointed by the President, two of whom the President shall designate as Co-Chairs. Members shall be citizens of the United States. It shall take two-thirds of the members of the Commission to constitute a quorum.
Sec. 4.
Meetings of the Commission and Direction of Its Work. The Co-Chairs of the Commission shall convene and preside at the meetings of the Commission, determine after consultation with other members of the Commission its agenda, direct its work, and assign responsibilities within the Commission.
Sec. 5.
Access to Information. (a) To carry out this order, the Commission shall have full and complete access to information relevant to its mission as described in section 2 of this order and in the possession, custody, or control of any executive department or agency to the maximum extent permitted by law and consistent with Executive Order 12958 of April 17, 1995, as amended. Heads of departments and agencies shall promptly furnish such information to the Commission upon request. The Attorney General and the Director of Central Intelligence shall ensure the expeditious processing of all appropriate security clearances necessary for the members of the Commission to fulfill their functions.
(b) Promptly upon commencing its work, the Commission shall adopt, after consultation with the Secretary of Defense, the Attorney General, and the Director of Central Intelligence, rules and procedures of the Commission for physical, communications, computer, document, personnel, and other security in relation to the work of the Commission. The Secretary of Defense, the Attorney General, and the Director of Central Intelligence shall promptly and jointly report to the President their judgment whether the security rules and procedures adopted by the Commission are clearly consistent with the national security and protect against unauthorized disclosure of information required by law or executive order to be protected against such disclosure. The President may at any time modify the security rules or procedures of the Commission to provide the necessary protection.
Sec. 6.
General Provisions. (a) In implementing this order, the Commission shall solely advise and assist the President.
(b) In performing its functions under this order, the Commission shall, subject to the authority of the President, be independent from any executive department or agency, or of any officer, employee, or agent thereof.Start Printed Page 6903
(c) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the authorities of any department, agency, entity, officer, or employee of the United States under applicable law.
(d) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(e) The Director of the Office of Administration shall provide or arrange for the provision of administrative support and, with the assistance of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, ensure funding for the Commission consistent with applicable law. The Director of the Office of Administration shall ensure that such support and funding meets the Commission's reasonable needs and that the manner of provision of support and funding is consistent with the authority of the Commission within the executive branch in the performance of its functions.
(f) Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation for their work on the Commission. Members who are not officers or employees in the executive branch, while engaged in the work of the Commission, may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in Government service (5 U.S.C. 5701 through 5707), consistent with the availability of funds.
(g) The Commission shall have a staff headed by an Executive Director. The Co-Chairs shall hire and employ, or obtain by assignment or detail from departments and agencies, the staff of the Commission, including the Executive Director.
(h) The term “Intelligence Community” is given the same meaning as contained in section 3(4) of the National Security Act of 1947, as amended (50 U.S.C. 401a(4)).
(i) The term “Weapons of Mass Destruction” is given the same meaning as contained in section 1403(1) of the Defense Against Weapons of Mass Destruction Act of 1996 (50 U.S.C. 2302(1)).
Sec. 7.
Judicial Review. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch, and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, against the United States, its departments, agencies, or other entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
Sec. 8.
Termination. The Commission shall terminate within 60 days after submitting its report.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13329 of February 24, 2004
Encouraging Innovation in Manufacturing
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Small Business Act, as amended (15 U.S.C. 631 et seq.), and to help ensure that Federal agencies properly and effectively assist the private sector in its manufacturing innovation efforts, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. Continued technological innovation is critical to a strong manufacturing sector in the United States economy. The Federal Government has an important role, including through the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) and the Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) programs, in helping to advance innovation, including innovation in manufacturing, through small businesses.
Sec. 2.
Duties of Department and Agency Heads. The head of each executive branch department or agency with one or more SBIR programs or one or more STTR programs shall:
(a) to the extent permitted by law and in a manner consistent with the mission of that department or agency, give high priority within such programs to manufacturing-related research and development to advance the policy set forth in section 1 of this order; and
(b) submit reports annually to the Administrator of the Small Business Administration and the Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy concerning the efforts of such department or agency to implement subsection 2(a) of this order.
Sec. 3.
Duties of Administrator of the Small Business Administration. The Administrator of the Small Business Administration:
(a) shall establish, after consultation with the Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy, formats and schedules for submission of reports by the heads of departments and agencies under subsection 2(b) of this order; and
(b) is authorized to issue to departments and agencies guidelines and directives (in addition to the formats and schedules under subsection 3(a)) as the Administrator determines from time to time are necessary to implement subsection 2(a) of this order, after such guidelines and directives are submitted to the President, through the Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy, for approval and are approved by the President.
Sec. 4.
Definitions. As used in this order:
(a) “Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program” means a program to which section 9(e)(4) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 638(e)(4)) refers;
(b) “Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) program” means a program to which section 9(e)(6) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 638(e)(6)) refers;
(c) “research and development” means an activity set forth in section 9(e)(5) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 638(e)(5)); and
(d) “manufacturing-related” means relating to: (i) manufacturing processes, equipment and systems; or (ii) manufacturing workforce skills and protection.
Sec. 5.
General Provisions. (a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the authority of the Director of the Office Start Printed Page 9182of Management and Budget with respect to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(b) Nothing in this order shall be construed to require disclosure of information the disclosure of which is prohibited by law or by Executive Order, including Executive Order 12958 of April 17, 1995, as amended.
(c) This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, against the United States, its departments, agencies, or other entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13330 of February 24, 2004
Human Service Transportation Coordination
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to enhance access to transportation to improve mobility, employment opportunities, and access to community services for persons who are transportation-disadvantaged, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. This order is issued consistent with the following findings and principles:
(a) A strong America depends on citizens who are productive and who actively participate in the life of their communities.
(b) Transportation plays a critical role in providing access to employment, medical and health care, education, and other community services and amenities. The importance of this role is underscored by the variety of transportation programs that have been created in conjunction with health and human service programs, and by the significant Federal investment in accessible public transportation systems throughout the Nation.
(c) These transportation resources, however, are often difficult for citizens to understand and access, and are more costly than necessary due to inconsistent and unnecessary Federal and State program rules and restrictions.
(d) A broad range of Federal program funding allows for the purchase or provision of transportation services and resources for persons who are transportation-disadvantaged. Yet, in too many communities, these services and resources are fragmented, unused, or altogether unavailable.
(e) Federally assisted community transportation services should be seamless, comprehensive, and accessible to those who rely on them for their lives and livelihoods. For persons with mobility limitations related to advanced age, persons with disabilities, and persons struggling for self-sufficiency, transportation within and between our communities should be as available and affordable as possible.
(f) The development, implementation, and maintenance of responsive, comprehensive, coordinated community transportation systems is essential for persons with disabilities, persons with low incomes, and older adults who rely on such transportation to fully participate in their communities.
Sec. 2.
Definitions. (a) As used in this order, the term “agency” means an executive department or agency of the Federal Government.
(b) For the purposes of this order, persons who are transportation-disadvantaged are persons who qualify for Federally conducted or Federally assisted transportation-related programs or services due to disability, income, or advanced age.
Sec. 3.
Establishment of the Interagency Transportation Coordinating Council on Access and Mobility. (a) There is hereby established, within the Department of Transportation for administrative purposes, the “Interagency Transportation Coordinating Council on Access and Mobility” (“Interagency Transportation Coordinating Council” or “Council”). The membership of the Interagency Transportation Coordinating Council shall consist of:
(i)
the Secretaries of Transportation, Health and Human Services, Education, Labor, Veterans Affairs, Agriculture, Housing and Urban Development, and the Interior, the Attorney General, and the Commissioner of Social Security; andStart Printed Page 9186
(ii)
such other Federal officials as the Chairperson of the Council may designate.
(b) The Secretary of Transportation, or the Secretary's designee, shall serve as the Chairperson of the Council. The Chairperson shall convene and preside at meetings of the Council, determine its agenda, direct its work, and, as appropriate to particular subject matters, establish and direct subgroups of the Council, which shall consist exclusively of the Council's members.
(c) A member of the Council may designate any person who is part of the member's agency and who is an officer appointed by the President or a full-time employee serving in a position with pay equal to or greater than the minimum rate payable for GS-15 of the General Schedule to perform functions of the Council or its subgroups on the member's behalf.
Sec 4.
Functions of the Interagency Transportation Coordinating Council. The Interagency Transportation Coordinating Council shall:
(a) promote interagency cooperation and the establishment of appropriate mechanisms to minimize duplication and overlap of Federal programs and services so that transportation-disadvantaged persons have access to more transportation services;
(b) facilitate access to the most appropriate, cost-effective transportation services within existing resources;
(c) encourage enhanced customer access to the variety of transportation and resources available;
(d) formulate and implement administrative, policy, and procedural mechanisms that enhance transportation services at all levels; and
(e) develop and implement a method for monitoring progress on achieving the goals of this order.
Sec. 5.
Report. In performing its functions, the Interagency Transportation Coordinating Council shall present to me a report not later than 1 calendar year from the date of this order. The report shall:
(a) Identify those Federal, State, Tribal and local laws, regulations, procedures, and actions that have proven to be most useful and appropriate in coordinating transportation services for the targeted populations;
(b) Identify substantive and procedural requirements of transportation-related Federal laws and regulations that are duplicative or restrict the laws' and regulations' most efficient operation;
(c) Describe the results achieved, on an agency and program basis, in: (i) simplifying access to transportation services for persons with disabilities, persons with low income, and older adults; (ii) providing the most appropriate, cost-effective transportation services within existing resources; and (iii) reducing duplication to make funds available for more services to more such persons;
(d) Provide recommendations to simplify and coordinate applicable substantive, procedural, and administrative requirements; and
(e) Provide any other recommendations that would, in the judgment of the Council, advance the principles set forth in section 1 of this order.
Sec. 6.
General. (a) Agencies shall assist the Interagency Transportation Coordinating Council and provide information to the Council consistent with applicable law as may be necessary to carry out its functions. To the extent permitted by law, and as permitted by available agency resources, the Department of Transportation shall provide funding and administrative support for the Council.
(b) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(c) This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, and does not, create any Start Printed Page 9187right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13331 of February 27, 2004
National and Community Service Programs
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to strengthen the ability of programs authorized under the national service laws to build and reinforce a culture of service, citizenship, and responsibility throughout our Nation, and to institute reforms to improve accountability and efficiency in the administration of those programs, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Definitions. For purposes of this order:
(a) “National service laws” means the National and Community Service Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12501 et seq.) and the Domestic Volunteer Service Act of 1973 (42 U.S.C. 4950 et seq.);
(b) “National and community service programs” means those programs authorized under the national service laws;
(c) “Policies governing programs authorized under the national service laws” refers to all policies, programs, guidelines, and regulations, including official guidance and internal agency procedures and practices, that are issued by the Corporation for National and Community Service (Corporation) and have significant effects on national and community service programs; and
(d) “Professional corps programs” means those programs described in section 122(a)(8) of the National and Community Service Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12572(a)(8)).
Sec. 2.
Fundamental Principles and Policymaking Criteria. In formulating and implementing policies governing programs authorized under the national service laws, the Corporation shall, to the extent permitted by law, adhere to the following fundamental principles:
(a) National and community service programs should support and encourage greater engagement of Americans in volunteering;
(b) National and community service programs should be more responsive to State and local needs;
(c) National and community service programs should make Federal support more accountable and more effective; and
(d) National and community service programs should expand opportunities for involvement of faith-based and other community organizations.
Sec. 3.
Agency Implementation. (a) The Chief Executive Officer of the Corporation for National and Community Service (Chief Executive Officer) shall, in coordination with the USA Freedom Corps Council, review and evaluate existing policies governing national and community service programs in order to assess the consistency of such policies with the fundamental principles and policymaking criteria described in section 2 of this order.
(b) The Chief Executive Officer shall ensure that all policies governing national and community service programs issued by the Corporation are consistent with the fundamental principles and policymaking criteria described in section 2 of this order. To that end, the Chief Executive Officer shall, to the extent permitted by law,
(i)
amend all such existing policies to ensure that they are consistent with the fundamental principles and policymaking criteria articulated in section 2 of this order; andStart Printed Page 9912
(ii)
where appropriate, implement new policies that are consistent with and necessary to further the fundamental principles and policymaking criteria set forth in section 2 of this order.
(c) In developing implementation steps, the Chief Executive Officer should address, at a minimum, the following objectives:
(i)
National and community service programs should leverage Federal resources to maximize support from the private sector and from State and local governments, with an emphasis on reforms that enhance programmatic flexibility, reduce administrative burdens, and calibrate Federal assistance to the respective needs of recipient organizations;
(ii)
National and community service programs should leverage Federal resources to enable the recruitment and effective management of a larger number of volunteers than is currently possible;
(iii)
National and community service programs should increase efforts to expand opportunities for, and strengthen the capacity of, faith-based and other community organizations in building and strengthening an infrastructure to support volunteers that meet community needs;
(iv)
National and community service programs should adopt performance measures to identify those practices that merit replication and further investment, as well as to ensure accountability;
(v)
National and community service programs should, consistent with the principles of Federalism and the constitutional role of the States and Indian tribes, promote innovation, flexibility, and results at all levels of government;
(vi)
National and community service programs based in schools should employ tutors who meet required paraprofessional qualifications, and use such practices and methodologies as are required for supplemental educational services;
(vii)
National and community service programs should foster a lifetime of citizenship and civic engagement among those who serve;
(viii)
National and community service programs should avoid or eliminate practices that displace volunteers who are not supported under the national service laws; and
(ix)
Guidelines for the selection of national and community service programs should recognize the importance of professional corps programs in light of the fundamental principles and policymaking criteria set forth in this order.
Sec. 4.
Management Reforms. (a) The Corporation should implement internal management reforms to strengthen its oversight of national and community service programs through enforcement of performance and compliance standards and other management tools.
(b) Management reforms should include, but should not be limited to, the following:
(i)
Institutionalized changes to the budgetary and grant-making processes to ensure that financial commitments remain within available resources;
(ii)
Enhanced accounting and management systems that would ensure compliance with fiscal restrictions and provide timely, accurate, and readily available information about enrollment in AmeriCorps and about funding and obligations incurred for all national and community service programs;
(iii)
Assurance by the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer in the Corporation's Management Representation Letter that its financial statements, including the Statement of Budgetary Resources, are accurate and reliable; and
(iv)
Management reforms that tie employee performance to fiscal responsibility, attainment of management goals, and professional conduct.
Sec. 5.
Report. Within 180 days after the date of this order, the Chief Executive Officer shall report to the President, through the Assistant to Start Printed Page 9913the President and Director of the USA Freedom Corps Office, the actions the Corporation proposes to undertake to accomplish the objectives set forth in this order.
Sec. 6.
Judicial Review. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, or other entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13332 of March 3, 2004
Further Adjustment of Certain Rates of Pay
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the laws cited herein, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Statutory Pay Systems. The rates of basic pay or salaries of the statutory pay systems (as defined in 5 U.S.C. 5302(1)), as adjusted under 5 U.S.C. 5303(a), are set forth on the schedules attached hereto and made a part hereof:
(a) The General Schedule (5 U.S.C. 5332(a)) at Schedule 1;
(b) The Foreign Service Schedule (22 U.S.C. 3963) at Schedule 2; and
(c) The schedules for the Veterans Health Administration of the Department of Veterans Affairs (38 U.S.C. 7306, 7404; section 301(a) of Public Law 102-40) at Schedule 3.
Sec. 2.
Senior Executive Service. The ranges of rates of basic pay for senior executives in the Senior Executive Service, as established pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 5382, as amended by section 1125 of Public Law 108-136, are set forth on Schedule 4 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 3.
Executive and Certain Other Salaries. The rates of basic pay or salaries for the following offices and positions are set forth on the schedules attached hereto and made a part hereof:
(a) The Executive Schedule (5 U.S.C. 5311-5318) at Schedule 5;
(b) The Vice President (3 U.S.C. 104) and the Congress (2 U.S.C. 31) at Schedule 6; and
(c) Justices and judges (28 U.S.C. 5, 44(d), 135, 252, and 461(a), section 140 of Public Law 97-92, and Public Law 108-167) at Schedule 7.
Sec. 4.
Uniformed Services. Pursuant to section 601(a)-(b) of Public Law 108-136, the rates of monthly basic pay (37 U.S.C. 203) for members of the uniformed services, as adjusted under 37 U.S.C. 1009, and the rate of monthly cadet or midshipman pay are set forth on Schedule 8 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 5.
Locality-Based Comparability Payments.
(a) Pursuant to section 5304 of title 5, United States Code, and in accordance with section 640(a) of Division F of Public Law 108-199, locality-based comparability payments shall be paid in accordance with Schedule 9 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
(b) The Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall take such actions as may be necessary to implement these payments and to publish appropriate notice of such payments in the Federal Register.
Sec. 6.
Administrative Law Judges. The rates of pay for administrative law judges, as adjusted under 5 U.S.C. 5372(b)(4), are set forth on Schedule 10 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 7.
Effective Dates. Schedule 8 is effective on January 1, 2004. The other schedules contained herein are effective on the first day of the first pay period beginning on or after January 1, 2004.Start Printed Page 10892
Sec. 8.
Prior Order Superseded. Executive Order 13322 of December 30, 2003, is superseded.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
March 3, 2004.
Start Printed Page 10893
Start Printed Page 10894
Start Printed Page 10895
Start Printed Page 10896
Start Printed Page 10897
Start Printed Page 10898
Start Printed Page 10899
Start Printed Page 10900
Executive Order 13333 of March 18, 2004
Amending Executive Order 13257 To Implement the
Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2003
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000 (22 U.S.C. 7101 et seq.) (the “Act”), as amended by the Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-193), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, it is hereby ordered that Executive Order 13257 of February 13, 2002, is amended as follows:
Section 1. The preamble is amended by: (a) deleting “7103” and inserting in lieu thereof “7101 et seq.”; and (b) after the phrase “(the “Act”),” inserting “and section 301 of title 3, United States Code,”.
Sec. 2. Section 4 is redesignated as section 8.
Sec. 3. After section 3, the following new sections are added:
“Sec. 4.
Guidelines, Policies, and Regulations. (a) The Senior Policy Operating Group (SPOG), described in subsection 105(f) of the Act, shall (i) establish guidelines and policies to coordinate the activities of executive branch departments and agencies regarding policies (including grants and grant policies) involving the international trafficking in persons and (ii) advise the Secretary of State what regulations may be necessary to implement section 105 of the Act, including such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the sharing of information on all matters relating to grants, grant policies, or other significant actions regarding the international trafficking in persons as set forth in subsection 105(f)(4) of the Act, to the extent permitted by law.
(b) The Secretary of State, in consultation with the members of the Task Force or their representatives, shall promulgate regulations to implement section 105 of the Act.
Sec. 5.
Enhanced Prevention of Trafficking in Persons. (a) The Secretary of State, in consultation with the members of the Task Force or their representatives, shall carry out the functions under subsection 106(c) and subsection 106(d) of the Act.
(b) The Secretary of State shall have the authority to determine, under section 106(e)(1) of the Act, foreign destinations where sex tourism is significant. The Secretary of Homeland Security, in consultation with the members of the Task Force or their representatives and appropriate officials of the Departments of Commerce and Transportation, shall carry out all other functions under subsection 106(e) of the Act, including promulgation of any appropriate regulations relating to the distribution of the materials described in subsection 106(e).
(c) The head of each executive branch agency responsible for the establishment and conduct of initiatives and programs described in subsections 106(a) through (e) of the Act shall consult with appropriate nongovernmental organizations consistent with section 106(f) of the Act.
(d) The Secretary of State shall have responsibility to initiate appropriate regulatory implementation of the requirements set out in section 106(g) of the Act with respect to contracts, including proposing appropriate amendments to the Federal Acquisition Regulation. Each affected executive branch department or agency shall implement, within that department or agency, Start Printed Page 13456the requirements set out in section 106(g) of the Act with respect to grants and cooperative agreements.
Sec. 6.
Research on Trafficking in Persons. The entities named in section 112A of the Act shall carry out the research initiatives required by section 112A of the Act, and shall award grants according to such policies and guidelines as may be established by the SPOG described in section 105(f) of the Act, as well as any applicable agency rules and regulations.
Sec. 7.
Guidance for Exercising Authority and Performing Duties. In exercising authority delegated by, or performing functions assigned in, this order, officers of the United States shall ensure that all actions taken by them are consistent with the President's constitutional authority to:
(a)
conduct the foreign affairs of the United States;
(b)
withhold information the disclosure of which could impair the foreign relations, the national security, the deliberative processes of the Executive, or the performance of the Executive's constitutional duties;
(c)
recommend for congressional consideration such measures as the President may judge necessary or expedient; and
(d)
supervise the unitary Executive Branch.”
Sec. 4.
Judicial Review. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13334 of April 10, 2004
Establishing an Emergency Board To Investigate a Dispute Between the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority and its Conductors Represented by the United Transportation Union
A dispute exists between the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority, and its conductors represented by the United Transportation Union.
The dispute has not heretofore been adjusted under the provisions of the Railway Labor Act, as amended, 45 U.S.C. 151-188 (the “Act”).
A party empowered by the Act has requested that the President establish an emergency board pursuant to section 9A of the Act (45 U.S.C. 159a).
Section 9A(c) of the Act provides that the President, upon such request, shall appoint an emergency board to investigate and report on the dispute.
NOW, THEREFORE, by the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, including section 9A of the Act, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment of Emergency Board (“Board”). There is established, effective April 12, 2004, a Board of three members to be appointed by the President to investigate and report on this dispute. No member shall be pecuniarily or otherwise interested in any organization of railroad employees or any carrier. The Board shall perform its functions subject to the availability of funds.
Sec. 2.
Report. The Board shall report to the President with respect to this dispute within 30 days of its creation.
Sec. 3.
Maintaining Conditions. As provided by section 9A(c) of the Act, from the date of the creation of the Board and for 120 days thereafter, no change in theconditions out of which the dispute arose shall be made by the parties to the controversy, except by agreement of the parties.
Sec. 4.
Records Maintenance. The records and files of the Board are records of the Office of the President and upon the Board's termination shall be maintained in the physical custody of the National Mediation Board.Start Printed Page 19918
Sec. 5.
Expiration. The Board shall terminate upon the submission of the report provided for in section 2 of this order.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13335 of April 27, 2004
Incentives for the Use of Health Information Technology and Establishing the Position of the National Health Information Technology Coordinator
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to provide leadership for the development and nationwide implementation of an interoperable health information technology infrastructure to improve the quality and efficiency of health care, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment. (a) The Secretary of Health and Human Services (Secretary) shall establish within the Office of the Secretary the position of National Health Information Technology Coordinator.
(b) The National Health Information Technology Coordinator (National Coordinator), appointed by the Secretary in consultation with the President or his designee, will report directly to the Secretary.
(c) The Secretary shall provide the National Coordinator with appropriate staff, administrative support, and other resources to meet its responsibilities under this order.
(d) The Secretary shall ensure that the National Coordinator begins operations within 90 days of the date of this order.
Sec. 2.
Policy. In fulfilling its responsibilities, the work of the National Coordinator shall be consistent with a vision of developing a nationwide interoperable health information technology infrastructure that:
(a) Ensures that appropriate information to guide medical decisions is available at the time and place of care;
(b) Improves health care quality, reduces medical errors, and advances the delivery of appropriate, evidence-based medical care;
(c) Reduces health care costs resulting from inefficiency, medical errors, inappropriate care, and incomplete information;
(d) Promotes a more effective marketplace, greater competition, and increased choice through the wider availability of accurate information on health care costs, quality, and outcomes;
(e) Improves the coordination of care and information among hospitals, laboratories, physician offices, and other ambulatory care providers through an effective infrastructure for the secure and authorized exchange of health care information; and
(f) Ensures that patients' individually identifiable health information is secure and protected.
Sec. 3.
Responsibilities of the National Health Information Technology Coordinator. (a) The National Coordinator shall, to the extent permitted by law, develop, maintain, and direct the implementation of a strategic plan to guide the nationwide implementation of interoperable health information technology in both the public and private health care sectors that will reduce medical errors, improve quality, and produce greater value for health care expenditures. The National Coordinator shall report to the Secretary regarding progress on the development and implementation of the strategic plan within 90 days after the National Coordinator begins operations and periodically thereafter. The plan shall:Start Printed Page 24060
(i)
Advance the development, adoption, and implementation of health care information technology standards nationally through collaboration among public and private interests, and consistent with current efforts to set health information technology standards for use by the Federal Government;
(ii)
Ensure that key technical, scientific, economic, and other issues affecting the public and private adoption of health information technology are addressed;
(iii)
Evaluate evidence on the benefits and costs of interoperable health information technology and assess to whom these benefits and costs accrue;
(iv)
Address privacy and security issues related to interoperable health information technology and recommend methods to ensure appropriate authorization, authentication, and encryption of data for transmission over the Internet;
(v)
Not assume or rely upon additional Federal resources or spending to accomplish adoption of interoperable health information technology; and
(vi)
Include measurable outcome goals.
(b) The National Coordinator shall:
(i)
Serve as the Secretary's principal advisor on the development, application, and use of health information technology, and direct the Department of Health and Human Service's health information technology programs;
(ii)
Ensure that health information technology policy and programs of the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) are coordinated with those of relevant executive branch agencies (including Federal commissions) with a goal of avoiding duplication of efforts and of helping to ensure that each agency undertakes activities primarily within the areas of its greatest expertise and technical capability;
(iii)
To the extent permitted by law, coordinate outreach and consultation by the relevant executive branch agencies (including Federal commissions) with public and private parties of interest, including consumers, providers, payers, and administrators; and
(iv)
At the request of the Office of Management and Budget, provide comments and advice regarding specific Federal health information technology programs.
Sec. 4.
Reports. To facilitate the development of interoperable health information technologies, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall report to the President within 90 days of this order on options to provide incentives in HHS programs that will promote the adoption of interoperable health information technology. In addition, the following reports shall be submitted to the President through the Secretary:
(a) The Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall report within 90 days of this order on options to provide incentives in the Federal Employee Health Benefit Program that will promote the adoption of interoperable health information technology; and
(b) Within 90 days, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Defense shall jointly report on the approaches the Departments could take to work more actively with the private sector to make their health information systems available as an affordable option for providers in rural and medically underserved communities.
Start Printed Page 24061
Sec. 5.
Administration and Judicial Review. (a) The actions directed by this order shall be carried out subject to the availability of appropriations and to the extent permitted by law.
(b) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity against the United States, its agencies, its entities or instrumentalities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13336 of April 30, 2004
American Indian and Alaska Native Education
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to recognize the unique educational and culturally related academic needs of American Indian and Alaska Native students consistent with the unique political and legal relationship of the Federal Government with tribal governments, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Purpose. The United States has a unique legal relationship with Indian tribes and a special relationship with Alaska Native entities as provided in the Constitution of the United States, treaties, and Federal statutes. This Administration is committed to continuing to work with these Federally recognized tribal governments on a government-to-government basis, and supports tribal sovereignty and self-determination. It is the purpose of this order to assist American Indian and Alaska Native students in meeting the challenging student academic standards of the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 (Public Law 107-110) in a manner that is consistent with tribal traditions, languages, and cultures. This order builds on the innovations, reforms, and high standards of the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001, including: stronger accountability for results; greater flexibility in the use of Federal funds; more choices for parents; and an emphasis on research-based instruction that works.
Sec. 2.
Interagency Working Group. There is established an Interagency Working Group on American Indian and Alaska Native Education (Working Group) to oversee the implementation of this order.
(a) The Working Group's members shall consist exclusively of the heads of the executive branch departments, agencies, or offices listed below:
(i)
the Department of Education;
(ii)
the Department of the Interior;
(iii)
the Department of Health and Human Services;
(iv)
the Department of Agriculture;
(v)
the Department of Justice;
(vi)
the Department of Labor; and
(vii)
such other executive branch departments, agencies, or offices as the Co-Chairs of the Working Group may designate.
A member of the Working Group may designate, to perform the Working Group functions of the member, an employee of the member's department, agency, or office who is either an officer of the United States appointed by the President, or a full-time employee serving in a position with pay equal to or greater than the minimum rate payable for GS-15 of the General Schedule. The Working Group shall be led by the Secretaries of Education and the Interior, or their designees under this section, who shall serve as Co-Chairs.
(b) The function of the Working Group is to oversee the implementation of this order. The Working Group shall, within 90 days of the date of this order, develop a Federal interagency plan that recommends initiatives, strategies, and ideas for future interagency actions that promote the purpose, as stated in section 1, of this order. In carrying out its activities under this order, the Working Group may consult with representatives of American Indian and Alaska Native tribes and organizations, in conformity with Executive Order 13175 of November 6, 2000, and with the National Advisory Council on Indian Education (NACIE). Any such consultations shall be Start Printed Page 25296for the purpose of obtaining information and advice concerning American Indian and Alaska Native education and shall be conducted in a manner that seeks individual advice and does not involve collective judgment or consensus advice or deliberation.
Sec. 3.
Study and Report. The Secretary of Education, in coordination with the Working Group, shall conduct a multi-year study of American Indian and Alaska Native education with the purpose of improving American Indian and Alaska Native students' ability to meet the challenging student academic standards of the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001.
(a) The study shall include, but not be limited to:
(i)
the compilation of comprehensive data on the academic achievement and progress of American Indian and Alaska Native students toward meeting the challenging student academic standards of the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001;
(ii)
identification and dissemination of research-based practices and proven methods in raising academic achievement and, in particular, reading achievement, of American Indian and Alaska Native students;
(iii)
assessment of the impact and role of native language and culture on the development of educational strategies to improve academic achievement;
(iv)
development of methods to strengthen early childhood education so that American Indian and Alaska Native students enter school ready to learn; and
(v)
development of methods to increase the high school graduation rate and develop pathways to college and the workplace for American Indian and Alaska Native students.
The Secretary of Education shall develop an agenda, including proposed timelines and ongoing activities, for the conduct of the study, and shall make that agenda available to the public on the Internet.
(b) The Secretary of Education, in coordination with the Working Group, shall issue a report to the President that shall:
(i)
provide the latest data available from the study;
(ii)
comprehensively describe the educational status and progress of American Indian and Alaska Native students with respect to meeting the goals outlined in the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 and any other student achievement goals the Secretary of Education or the Secretary of the Interior may deem necessary;
(iii)
report on proven methods for improving American Indian and Alaska Native student academic achievement; and
(iv)
update the Federal interagency plan outlined in section 2(b) of this order.
Sec. 4.
Enhancement of Research Capabilities of Tribal-Level Educational Institutions. The Secretary of Education and the Secretary of the Interior shall consult with the entities set forth in section 2(a) of this order and tribally controlled colleges and universities to seek ways to develop and enhance the capacity of tribal governments, tribal universities and colleges, and schools and educational programs serving American Indian and Alaska Native students and communities to carry out, disseminate, and implement education research, as well as to develop related partnerships or collaborations with non-tribal universities, colleges, and research organizations.
Sec. 5.
National Conference. The Secretary of Education and the Secretary of the Interior, in collaboration with the Working Group and Federal, State, tribal, and local government representatives, shall jointly convene a forum on the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 to identify means to enhance communication, collaboration, and cooperative strategies to improve the education of American Indian and Alaska Native students attending Federal, State, tribal, and local schools.
Sec. 6.
Administration. The Department of Education shall provide appropriate administrative services and staff support to the Working Group. With Start Printed Page 25297the consent of the Department of Education, other participating agencies may provide administrative support to the Working Group, to the extent permitted by law and consistent with their statutory authority.
Sec. 7.
Termination. The Working Group established under section 2 of this order shall terminate not later than 5 years from the date of this order, unless extended by the President.
Sec. 8.
Consultation. The Secretary of Education and Secretary of the Interior shall consult the Attorney General as appropriate on the implementation of this order, to ensure that such implementation affords the equal protection of the laws required by the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution.
Sec. 9.
General Provisions.
(a) This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, and does not, create any right, benefit, or trust responsibility, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity, by a party against the United States, its agencies or instrumentalities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
(b) Executive Order 13096 of August 6, 1998, is revoked.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 25299
Executive Order 13337 of April 30, 2004
Issuance of Permits With Respect to Certain Energy-Related Facilities and Land Transportation Crossings on the International Boundaries of the United States
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and in order to amend Executive Order 11423 of August 16, 1968, as amended, and to further the policy of my Administration as stated in Executive Order 13212 of May 18, 2001, as amended, to expedite reviews of permits as necessary to accelerate the completion of energy production and transmission projects, and to provide a systematic method for evaluating and permitting the construction and maintenance of certain border crossings for land transportation, including motor and rail vehicles, that do not require construction or maintenance of facilities connecting the United States with a foreign country, while maintaining safety, public health, and environmental protections, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. (a) Except with respect to facilities covered by Executive Order 10485 of September 3, 1953, and Executive Order 10530 of May 10, 1954, the Secretary of State is hereby designated and empowered to receive all applications for Presidential permits, as referred to in Executive Order 11423, as amended, for the construction, connection, operation, or maintenance, at the borders of the United States, of facilities for the exportation or importation of petroleum, petroleum products, coal, or other fuels to or from a foreign country.
(b) Upon receipt of a completed application pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section, the Secretary of State shall:
(i)
Request additional information needed from the applicant, as appropriate, before referring the application to other agencies pursuant to paragraph (b)(ii) of this section;
(ii)
Refer the application and pertinent information to, and request the views of, the Secretary of Defense, the Attorney General, the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of Commerce, the Secretary of Transportation, the Secretary of Energy, the Secretary of Homeland Security, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, or the heads of the departments or agencies in which the relevant authorities or responsibilities of the foregoing are subsequently conferred or transferred, and, for applications concerning the border with Mexico, the United States Commissioner of the International Boundary and Water Commission; and
(iii)
Refer the application and pertinent information to, and request the views of, such other Federal Government department and agency heads as the Secretary of State deems appropriate.
(c) All Federal Government officials consulted by the Secretary of State pursuant to paragraph (b)(ii) or (b)(iii) of this section shall provide their views and render such assistance as may be requested, consistent with their authority, in a timely manner, but not to exceed 90 days from the date of the request.
(d) Should any of the Federal Government officials consulted pursuant to paragraph (b)(ii) or (b)(iii) of this section request from the Department of State additional information that is necessary for them to provide their views or to render such assistance as may be required, the time elapsed Start Printed Page 25300between the date of that request for additional information and the date such additional information is received shall not be counted in calculating the time period prescribed in paragraph (c) of this section.
(e) The Secretary of State may also consult with such State, tribal, and local government officials and foreign governments, as the Secretary deems appropriate, with respect to each application. The Secretary shall solicit responses in a timely manner, not to exceed 90 days from the date of the request.
(f) Upon receiving the views and assistance requested pursuant to paragraphs (b) and (e) of this section, the Secretary of State shall consider, in light of any statutory or other requirements or other considerations, whether or not additional information is needed in order to evaluate the application and, as appropriate, request such information from the applicant.
(g) After consideration of the views and assistance obtained pursuant to paragraphs (b) and, as appropriate, (e) and (f) of this section and any public comments submitted pursuant to section 3(a) of this order, if the Secretary of State finds that issuance of a permit to the applicant would serve the national interest, the Secretary shall prepare a permit, in such form and with such terms and conditions as the national interest may in the Secretary's judgment require, and shall notify the officials required to be consulted under paragraph (b)(ii) of this section of the proposed determination that a permit be issued.
(h) After consideration of the views obtained pursuant to paragraphs (b) and, as appropriate, (e) and (f) of this section and any public comments provided pursuant to section 3(a) of this order, if the Secretary of State finds that issuance of a permit to the applicant would not serve the national interest, the Secretary shall notify the officials required to be consulted under paragraph (b)(ii) of this section of the proposed determination that the application be denied.
(i) The Secretary of State shall issue or deny the permit in accordance with the proposed determination unless, within 15 days after notification pursuant to paragraphs (g) or (h) of this section, an official required to be consulted under paragraph (b)(ii) of this section shall notify the Secretary of State that he or she disagrees with the Secretary's proposed determination and requests the Secretary to refer the application to the President. In the event of such a request, the Secretary of State shall consult with any such requesting official and, if necessary, shall refer the application, together with statements of the views of any official involved, to the President for consideration and a final decision.
Sec. 2. (a) Section 1(a) of Executive Order 11423, as amended, is amended to read as follows: “Except with respect to facilities covered by Executive Order Nos. 10485 and 10530, and by section 1(a) of the Executive Order of April 30, 2004, entitled “Issuance of Permits with Respect to Certain Energy-Related Facilities and Land Transportation Crossings on the International Boundaries of the United States” (the order of April 30, 2004), the Secretary of State is hereby designated and empowered to receive all applications for Presidential permits for the construction, connection, operation, or maintenance, at the borders of the United States, of:
(i)
pipelines, conveyor belts, and similar facilities for the exportation or importation of all products, except those specified in section 1(a) of the order of April 30, 2004, to or from a foreign country;
(ii)
facilities for the exportation or importation of water or sewage to or from a foreign country;
(iii)
facilities for the transportation of persons or things, or both, to or from a foreign country;
(iv)
bridges, to the extent that congressional authorization is not required;
(v)
similar facilities above or below ground; andStart Printed Page 25301
(vi)
border crossings for land transportation, including motor and rail vehicles, to or from a foreign country, whether or not in conjunction with the facilities identified in (iii) above.
(b) Section 1(b) of Executive Order 11423, as amended, is amended by deleting the text “(a)(iii), (iv), or (v)” and by inserting the text “(a)(iii), (iv), (v), or (vi)” in lieu thereof.
Sec. 3. (a) The Secretary of State may provide for the publication in the Federal Register of notice of receipt of applications, for the receipt of public comments on applications, and for notices related to the issuance or denial of applications.
(b) The Secretary of State is authorized to issue such further rules and regulations, and to prescribe such further procedures, including, but not limited to, those relating to the International Boundary and Water Commission, as may from time to time be deemed necessary or desirable for the exercise of the authority conferred by this order.
Sec. 4. All permits heretofore issued with respect to facilities described in section 2(a) of this order pursuant to Executive Order 11423, as amended, and in force at the time of issuance of this order, and all permits issued hereunder, shall remain in effect in accordance with their terms unless and until modified, amended, suspended, or revoked by the appropriate authority.
Sec. 5. Nothing contained in this order shall be construed to affect the authority of any department or agency of the United States Government, or to supersede or replace the requirements established under any other provision of law, or to relieve a person from any requirement to obtain authorization from any other department or agency of the United States Government in compliance with applicable laws and regulations subject to the jurisdiction of that department or agency.
Sec. 6. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right, benefit, or trust responsibility, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13338 of May 11, 2004
Blocking Property of Certain Persons and Prohibiting the Export of Certain Goods to Syria
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) (NEA), the Syria Accountability and Lebanese Sovereignty Restoration Act of 2003, Public Law 108-175 (SAA), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, hereby determine that the actions of the Government of Syria in supporting terrorism, continuing its occupation of Lebanon, pursuing weapons of mass destruction and missile programs, and undermining United States and international efforts with respect to the stabilization and reconstruction of Iraq constitute an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy of the United States and hereby declare a national emergency to deal with that threat. To address that threat, and to implement the SAA, I hereby order the following:
Section 1. (a) The Secretary of State shall not permit the exportation or reexportation to Syria of any item on the United States Munitions List (22 C.F.R. part 121).
(b) Except to the extent provided in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to the provisions of this order in a manner consistent with the SAA, and notwithstanding any license, permit, or authorization granted prior to the effective date of this order, (i) the Secretary of Commerce shall not permit the exportation or reexportation to Syria of any item on the Commerce Control List (15 C.F.R. part 774); and (ii) with the exception of food and medicine, the Secretary of Commerce shall not permit the exportation or reexportation to Syria of any product of the United States not included in section 1(b)(i) of this order.
(c) No other agency of the United States Government shall permit the exportation or reexportation to Syria of any product of the United States, except to the extent provided in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order in a manner consistent with the SAA, and notwithstanding any license, permit, or authorization granted prior to the effective date of this order.
Sec. 2. The Secretary of Transportation shall not permit any air carrier owned or controlled by Syria to provide foreign air transportation as defined in 49 U.S.C. 40102(a)(23), except that he may, to the extent consistent with Department of Transportation regulations, permit such carriers to charter aircraft to the Government of Syria for the transport of Syrian government officials to and from the United States on official Syrian government business. In addition, the Secretary of Transportation shall prohibit all takeoffs and landings in the United States, other than those associated with an emergency, by any such air carrier when engaged in scheduled international air services.
Sec. 3. (a) Except to the extent provided in section 203(b)(1), (3), and (4) of the IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(1), (3), and (4)), and the Trade Sanctions Reform and Export Enhancement Act of 2000 (title IX, Public Law 106-387) (TSRA), or regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date of this order, Start Printed Page 26752all property and interests in property of the following persons, that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of United States persons, including their overseas branches, are blocked and may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in: persons who are determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State,
(i)
to be or to have been directing or otherwise significantly contributing to the Government of Syria's provision of safe haven to or other support for any person whose property or interests in property are blocked under United States law for terrorism-related reasons, including, but not limited to, Hamas, Hizballah, Palestinian Islamic Jihad, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command, and any persons designated pursuant to Executive Order 13224 of September 23, 2001;
(ii)
to be or to have been directing or otherwise significantly contributing to the Government of Syria's military or security presence in Lebanon;
(iii)
to be or to have been directing or otherwise significantly contributing to the Government of Syria's pursuit of the development and production of chemical, biological, or nuclear weapons and medium- and long-range surface-to-surface missiles;
(iv)
to be or to have been directing or otherwise significantly contributing to any steps taken by the Government of Syria to undermine United States and international efforts with respect to the stabilization and reconstruction of Iraq; or
(v)
to be owned or controlled by, or acting or purporting to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any person whose property or interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order.
(b) The prohibitions in paragraph (a) of this section include, but are not limited to, (i) the making of any contribution of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any person whose property or interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order; and (ii) the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.
Sec. 4. (a) Any transaction by a United States person or within the United States that evades or avoids, has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
(b) Any conspiracy formed to violate the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
Sec. 5. I hereby determine that the making of donations of the type of articles specified in section 203(b)(2) of the IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)) would seriously impair the ability to deal with the national emergency declared in this order, and hereby prohibit, (i) the exportation or reexportation of such donated articles to Syria as provided in section 1(b) of this order; and (ii) the making of such donations by, to, or for the benefit of any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to section 3 of this order.
Sec. 6. For purposes of this order:
(a) the term “person” means an individual or entity;
(b) the term “entity” means a partnership, association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization;
(c) the term “United States person” means any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States;
(d) the term “Government of Syria” means the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, its agencies, instrumentalities, and controlled entities; andStart Printed Page 26753
(e) the term “product of the United States” means: for the purposes of subsection 1(b), any item subject to the Export Administration Regulations (15 C.F.R. parts 730-774); and for the purposes of subsection 1(c), any item subject to the export licensing jurisdiction of any other United States Government agency.
Sec. 7. With respect to the prohibitions contained in section 1 of this order, consistent with subsection 5(b) of the SAA, I hereby determine that it is in the national security interest of the United States to waive, and hereby waive application of subsection 5(a)(1) and subsection 5(a)(2)(A) of the SAA so as to permit the exportation or reexportation of certain items as specified in the Department of Commerce's General Order No. 2 to Supplement No. 1, 15 C.F.R. part 736, as issued consistent with this order and as may be amended pursuant to the provisions of this order and in a manner consistent with the SAA. This waiver is made pursuant to the SAA only to the extent that regulation of such exports or reexports would not otherwise fall within my constitutional authority to conduct the Nation's foreign affairs and protect national security.
Sec. 8. With respect to the prohibitions contained in section 2 of this order, consistent with subsection 5(b) of the SAA, I hereby determine that it is in the national security interest of the United States to waive, and hereby waive, application of subsection 5(a)(2)(D) of the SAA insofar as it pertains to: aircraft of any air carrier owned or controlled by Syria chartered by the Syrian government for the transport of Syrian government officials to and from the United States on official Syrian government business, to the extent consistent with Department of Transportation regulations; takeoffs or landings for non-traffic stops of aircraft of any such air carrier that is not engaged in scheduled international air services; takeoffs and landings associated with an emergency; and overflights of United States territory.
Sec. 9. I hereby direct the Secretary of State to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, as may be necessary to carry out subsection 1(a) of this order. I hereby direct the Secretary of Commerce, in consultation with the Secretary of State, to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, as may be necessary to carry out subsection 1(b) of this order. I direct the Secretary of Transportation, in consultation with the Secretary of State, to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, as may be necessary to carry out section 2 of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by the IEEPA as may be necessary to carry out sections 3, 4, and 5 of this order. The Secretaries of State, Commerce, Transportation, and the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government consistent with applicable law. The Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secretaries of Commerce, Transportation, and the Treasury, as appropriate, is authorized to exercise the functions and authorities conferred upon the President in subsection 5(b) of the SAA and to redelegate these functions and authorities consistent with applicable law. All agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order and, where appropriate, to advise the Secretaries of State, Commerce, Transportation, and the Treasury in a timely manner of the measures taken.
Sec. 10. This order is not intended to create, and does not create, any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
Sec. 11. For those persons whose property or interests in property are blocked pursuant to section 3 of this order who might have a constitutional presence in the United States, I find that because of the ability to transfer funds or assets instantaneously, prior notice to such persons of measures Start Printed Page 26754to be taken pursuant to this order would render these measures ineffectual. I therefore determine that for these measures to be effective in addressing the national emergency declared in this order, there need be no prior notice of a listing or determination made pursuant to this order.
Sec. 12. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is authorized to submit the recurring and final reports to the Congress on the national emergency declared in this order, consistent with section 401(c) of the NEA, 50 U.S.C. 1641(c), and section 204(c) of the IEEPA, 50 U.S.C. 1703(c).
Sec. 13. (a) This order is effective at 12:01 eastern daylight time on May 12, 2004.
(b) This order shall be transmitted to the Congress and published in the Federal Register.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13339 of May 13, 2004
Increasing Economic Opportunity and Business Participation of Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and for the purpose of providing equal economic opportunities for full participation of Asian American and Pacific Islander businesses in our free market economy where they may be underserved and thus improving the quality of life for Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. (a) There is established in the Department of Commerce the President's Advisory Commission on Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders (Commission). The Commission shall consist of not more than 15 members appointed by the President, one of whom shall be designated by the President as Chair. The Commission shall include members who: (i) have a history of involvement with the Asian American and Pacific Islander communities; (ii) are from the business enterprise sector; (iii) are from civic associations representing one or more of the diverse Asian American and Pacific Islander communities; (iv) are from the fields of economic, social, and community development; or (v) have such other experience as the President deems appropriate.
(b) The Secretary of Commerce (Secretary) shall designate an Executive Director for the Commission.
Sec. 2. The Commission shall provide advice to the President, through the Secretary, on:
(a) the development, monitoring, and coordination of executive branch efforts to improve the economic and community development of Asian American and Pacific Islander businesses through ensuring equal opportunity to participate in Federal programs, and public-sector, private-sector partnerships, and through the collection of data related to Asian American and Pacific Islander businesses; and
(b) ways to increase the business diversification of Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders, including ways to foster research and data on Asian American and Pacific Islander businesses including their level of participation in the national economy and their economic and community development.
Sec. 3. (a) The Secretary shall establish within the Department of Commerce an office known as the White House Initiative on Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders (Office). The Office shall provide support for the Commission and the interagency working group created in section 3(b) of this order.
(b) The Secretary shall also create an interagency working group (Working Group) whose activities shall be coordinated by the Department of Commerce. The Secretary shall designate the executive departments and agencies that shall serve on the Working Group (executive departments and agencies) and the heads of those departments and agencies shall select the officials that shall serve as their respective representatives on the Working Group. The Executive Director of the Commission shall also serve as the Director of the Office and the Working Group, and shall report to the Secretary or the Secretary's designee. The Director of the Working Group shall advise the Secretary or the Secretary's designee on efforts by the Federal Government to improve access to economic opportunities, through equal access to such opportunities, for Asian American and Pacific Islander businesses where Start Printed Page 28038they may be underserved and thus to improve the quality of life of Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders.
Sec. 4. The head of each executive department and agency on the Working Group shall designate a senior Federal official responsible for management or program administration to report directly to the agency head on activities implementing this order and to serve as a liaison to, and representative on, the Working Group. The Secretary may designate additional Federal officials, with the concurrence of the head of the designated executive department or agency, to carry out functions of the Working Group. To the extent permitted by law and to the extent practicable, each designated executive department and agency shall provide appropriate information requested by the Working Group, including data relating to the eligibility for and participation of Asian American and Pacific Islander businesses in Federal programs. Where adequate data are not available, the Working Group shall suggest the means of collecting such data.
Sec. 5. Each designated executive department and agency shall prepare a plan for, and shall document, its efforts to support economic opportunities for Asian American and Pacific Islander businesses. This plan shall address, among other things, executive branch efforts to:
(a) increase participation in Federal programs for Asian American and Pacific Islander businesses through equal access to such programs;
(b) ensure nondiscrimination in Federal contracts and procurement opportunities;
(c) provide equal opportunity for public-sector, private-sector partnerships for the community and economic development of Asian American and Pacific Islander businesses; and
(d) foster research and data collection on Asian American and Pacific Islander businesses. Each plan shall be submitted through the working group and the Commission to the Secretary at a date to be established by the Secretary.
Sec. 6. The Secretary shall review the plans of the designated executive departments and agencies and develop for submission to the President for his approval an integrated Federal plan (Federal Plan) to increase the participation of Asian American and Pacific Islander businesses in executive branch programs through equal access to such programs where such organizations may be underserved. Actions described in the Federal Plan shall address improving access by Asian American and Pacific Islander businesses to Federal programs and fostering advances in relevant research and data as it pertains to community economic development. The Secretary shall disseminate the Federal Plan, to the extent the Plan is approved by the President, to appropriate members of the executive branch. The findings and recommendations in the Federal Plan shall be followed by the designated executive departments and agencies in their policies and activities, to the extent permitted by law and as practicable.
Sec. 7. Insofar as the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.) (the “Act”), may apply to the administration of any portion of this order, any functions of the President under the Act, except that of reporting to the Congress, shall be performed by the Secretary in accordance with the guidelines issued by the Administrator of General Services.
Sec. 8. Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, but shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in the Government service (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707). To the extent permitted by law and appropriations, and where practicable, executive departments and agencies shall, upon request by the Secretary, provide assistance to the Commission and to the Working Group, and the Department of Commerce shall provide administrative support and funding for the Commission.
Sec. 9. The Commission shall terminate 2 years from the date of this order, unless renewed by the President.Start Printed Page 28039
Sec. 10. For the purposes of this order, the term: (a) “Asian” includes persons having origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East, Southeast Asia, or the Indian subcontinent; and the term (b) “Pacific Islander” includes persons having origins in any of the original peoples of Hawaii, Guam, Samoa, or other Pacific Islands.
Sec. 11. The Secretary of Commerce shall consult the Attorney General as appropriate on the implementation of this order to ensure that such implementation affords the equal protection of the laws required by the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution.
Sec. 12. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13340 of May 18, 2004
Establishment of Great Lakes Interagency Task Force and Promotion of a Regional Collaboration of National Significance for the Great Lakes
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to help establish a regional collaboration of national significance for the Great Lakes, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. The Great Lakes are a national treasure constituting the largest freshwater system in the world. The United States and Canada have made great progress addressing past and current environmental impacts to the Great Lakes ecology. The Federal Government is committed to making progress on the many significant challenges that remain. Along with numerous State, tribal, and local programs, over 140 Federal programs help fund and implement environmental restoration and management activities throughout the Great Lakes system. A number of intergovernmental bodies are providing leadership in the region to address environmental and resource management issues in the Great Lakes system. These activities would benefit substantially from more systematic collaboration and better integration of effort. It is the policy of the Federal Government to support local and regional efforts to address environmental challenges and to encourage local citizen and community stewardship. To this end, the Federal Government will partner with the Great Lakes States, tribal and local governments, communities, and other interests to establish a regional collaboration to address nationally significant environmental and natural resource issues involving the Great Lakes. It is the further policy of the Federal Government that its executive departments and agencies will ensure that their programs are funding effective, coordinated, and environmentally sound activities in the Great Lakes system.
Sec. 2.
Definitions. For purposes of this order:
(a) “Great Lakes” means Lake Ontario, Lake Erie, Lake Huron (including Lake Saint Clair), Lake Michigan, and Lake Superior, and the connecting channels (Saint Marys River, Saint Clair River, Detroit River, Niagara River, and Saint Lawrence River to the Canadian Border).
(b) “Great Lakes system” means all the streams, rivers, lakes, and other bodies of water within the drainage basin of the Great Lakes.
Sec. 3.
Great Lakes Interagency Task Force.
(a) Task Force Purpose. To further the policy described in section 1 of this order, there is established, within the Environmental Protection Agency for administrative purposes, the “Great Lakes Interagency Task Force” (Task Force) to:
(i)
Help convene and establish a process for collaboration among the members of the Task Force and the members of the Working Group that is established in paragraph b(ii) of this section, with the Great Lakes States, local communities, tribes, regional bodies, and other interests in the Great Lakes region regarding policies, strategies, plans, programs, projects, activities, and priorities for the Great Lakes system.
(ii)
Collaborate with Canada and its provinces and with bi-national bodies involved in the Great Lakes region regarding policies, strategies, projects, and priorities for the Great Lakes system.Start Printed Page 29044
(iii)
Coordinate the development of consistent Federal policies, strategies, projects, and priorities for addressing the restoration and protection of the Great Lakes system and assisting in the appropriate management of the Great Lakes system.
(iv)
Develop outcome-based goals for the Great Lakes system relying upon, among other things, existing data and science-based indicators of water quality and related environmental factors. These goals shall focus on outcomes such as cleaner water, sustainable fisheries, and biodiversity of the Great Lakes system and ensure that Federal policies, strategies, projects, and priorities support measurable results.
(v)
Exchange information regarding policies, strategies, projects, and activities of the agencies represented on the Task Force related to the Great Lakes system.
(vi)
Work to coordinate government action associated with the Great Lakes system.
(vii)
Ensure coordinated Federal scientific and other research associated with the Great Lakes system.
(viii)
Ensure coordinated government development and implementation of the Great Lakes portion of the Global Earth Observation System of Systems.
(ix)
Provide assistance and support to agencies represented on the Task Force in their activities related to the Great Lakes system.
(x)
Submit a report to the President by May 31, 2005, and thereafter as appropriate, that summarizes the activities of the Task Force and provides any recommendations that would, in the judgment of the Task Force, advance the policy set forth in section 1 of this order.
(b) Membership and Operation.
(i)
The Task Force shall consist exclusively of the following officers of the United States: the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency (who shall chair the Task Force), the Secretary of State, the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of Commerce, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, the Secretary of Transportation, the Secretary of Homeland Security, the Secretary of the Army, and the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality. A member of the Task Force may designate, to perform the Task Force functions of the member, any person who is part of the member's department, agency, or office and who is either an officer of the United States appointed by the President or a full-time employee serving in a position with pay equal to or greater than the minimum rate payable for GS-15 of the General Schedule. The Task Force shall report to the President through the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality.
(ii)
The Task Force shall establish a “Great Lakes Regional Working Group” (Working Group) composed of the appropriate regional administrator or director with programmatic responsibility for the Great Lakes system for each agency represented on the Task Force including: the Great Lakes National Program Office of the Environmental Protection Agency; the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, National Park Service, and United States Geological Survey within the Department of the Interior; the Natural Resources Conservation Service and the Forest Service of the Department of Agriculture; the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration of the Department of Commerce; the Department of Housing and Urban Development; the Department of Transportation; the Coast Guard within the Department of Homeland Security; and the Army Corps of Engineers within the Department of the Army. The Working Group will coordinate and make recommendations on how to implement the policies, strategies, projects, and priorities of the Task Force.Start Printed Page 29045
(c) Management Principles for Regional Collaboration of National Significance. To further the policy described in section 1, the Task Force shall recognize and apply key principles and foster conditions to ensure successful collaboration. To that end, the Environmental Protection Agency will coordinate the development of a set of principles of successful collaboration.
Sec. 4.
Great Lakes National Program Office. The Great Lakes National Program Office of the Environmental Protection Agency shall assist the Task Force and the Working Group in the performance of their functions. The Great Lakes National Program Manager shall serve as chair of the Working Group.
Sec. 5.
Preservation of Authority. Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, regulatory, and legislative proposals. Nothing in this order shall be construed to affect the statutory authority or obligations of any Federal agency or any bi-national agreement with Canada.
Sec. 6.
Judicial Review. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and is not intended to, and does not, create any right, benefit, or trust responsibility, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13341 of May 20, 2004
Further Amendment to Executive Order
11023, Providing for the Performance by the Secretary of Commerce of Certain Functions Relating to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 301 of title 3, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. As a result of the enactment of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Commissioned Officer Corps Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-372), the following conforming amendments are made to Executive Order 11023 of May 28, 1962, as amended:
(a) In section 1(a), delete “section 6(b) of the Coast and Geodetic Survey Commissioned Officers Act of 1948 (62 Stat. 298; 33 U.S.C. 853e(b))” and insert in lieu thereof: “section 223(b) of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Commissioned Officer Corps Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-372; 33 U.S.C. 3023(b))”.
(b) In section 1(b), delete “section 12(a) of the Coast and Geodetic Survey Commissioned Officers Act of 1948, as amended (75 Stat. 506; 33 U.S.C. 853j-1(a))” and insert in lieu thereof: “section 229(a) of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Commissioned Officer Corps Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-372; 33 U.S.C. 3029(a))”.
(c) In section 1(c), delete “section 12(b) of the Coast and Geodetic Survey Commissioned Officers Act of 1948, as amended (75 Stat. 506; 33 U.S.C. 853j-1(b))” and insert in lieu thereof: “section 229(b) of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Commissioned Officer Corps Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-372; 33 U.S.C. 3029(b))”.
(d) In section 1(d), delete “section 12(c) of the Coast and Geodetic Survey Commissioned Officers Act of 1948, as amended (75 Stat. 506; 33 U.S.C. 853j-1(c))” and insert in lieu thereof: “section 229(c) of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Commissioned Officer Corps Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-372; 33 U.S.C. 3029(c))”.
(e) Section 1(e) shall be revised to read as follows: “The authority vested in the President by section 243(b) of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Commissioned Officer Corps Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-372; 33 U.S.C. 3043(b)), to defer the retirement of an officer of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration serving in a rank above that of captain who has attained 62 years of age, but such a deferment may not extend beyond the first day of the month in which the officer becomes 64 years of age.”
(f) Section 1(f) shall be revised to read as follows: “The authority vested in the President by section 244 of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Commissioned Officer Corps Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-372; 33 U.S.C. 3044), to retire from the active service any commissioned officer of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, upon his own application, who has completed 20 years of active service, of which at least 10 years was service as a commissioned officer.”
(g) In section 1(g), delete “section 23(a) of the Coast and Geodetic Survey Commissioned Officers Act of 1948, as amended (75 Stat. 506; 33 U.S.C. Start Printed Page 29844853t(a))” and insert in lieu thereof: “section 221(a)(4) of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Commissioned Officer Corps Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-372; 33 U.S.C. 3021(a)(4))”.
(h) In section 1(h), delete “section 1(1) of the Act of December 3, 1942 (56 Stat. 1038; 33 U.S.C. 854a-1(1))” and insert in lieu thereof: “section 230(b)(1) of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Commissioned Officer Corps Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-372; 33 U.S.C. 3030(b)(1))”.
(i) In section 1(i), delete “section 1(2) of the Act of December 3, 1942 (56 Stat. 1038; 33 U.S.C. 854a-1(2))” and insert in lieu thereof: “section 230(b)(2) of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Commissioned Officer Corps Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-372; 33 U.S.C. 3030(b)(2))”.
(j) Section 1(j) shall be revised to read as follows: “The authority contained in section 230(b)(3) of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Commissioned Officer Corps Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-372; 33 U.S.C. 3030(b)(3)), to appoint temporarily in all grades to which original appointments in the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration are authorized to fill vacancies caused by transfer of officers to the military departments.”
(k) In section 1(k), delete “section 16 of the Act of May 22, 1917 (40 Stat. 87; 33 U.S.C. 855)” and insert in lieu thereof: “section 251 of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Commissioned Officer Corps Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-372; 33 U.S.C. 3061)”, and delete the word “personnel” in the two places in which it appears and insert in lieu thereof: “officers”.
Sec. 2. Section 1(m) is added to Executive Order 11023 to read as follows: “(m) The authority vested in the President by Public Law 96-215, as amended (10 U.S.C. 716(a)), to transfer any commissioned officer with his consent from his uniformed service to, and appoint him in, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, provided consent for the transfer is given by the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Homeland Security, or the Secretary of Health and Human Services, as applicable, in accordance with joint regulations issued under that statute establishing the policies and procedures for such transfers and appointments.”
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13342 of June 1, 2004
Responsibilities of the Departments of Commerce and Veterans Affairs and the Small Business Administration With Respect to Faith-Based and Community Initiatives
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to help the Federal Government coordinate a national effort to expand opportunities for faith-based and other community organizations and to strengthen their capacity to better meet America's social and community needs, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment of Centers for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives at the Departments of Commerce and Veterans Affairs and the Small Business Administration.
(a) The Secretaries of Commerce and Veterans Affairs and the Administrator of the Small Business Administration shall each establish within their respective agencies a Center for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives (Center).
(b) Each of these Centers shall be supervised by a Director, appointed by the agency head in consultation with the White House Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives (White House OFBCI).
(c) Each agency shall provide its Center with appropriate staff, administrative support, and other resources to meet its responsibilities under this order.
(d) Each Center shall begin operations no later than 45 days from the date of this order.
Sec. 2.
Purpose of Executive Branch Centers for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives. The purpose of the agency Centers will be to coordinate agency efforts to eliminate regulatory, contracting, and other programmatic obstacles to the participation of faith-based and other community organizations in the provision of social and community services.
Sec. 3.
Responsibilities of the Centers for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives. Each Center shall, to the extent permitted by law:
(a) conduct, in coordination with the White House OFBCI, an agency-wide audit to identify all existing barriers to the participation of faith-based and other community organizations in the delivery of social and community services by the agency, including but not limited to regulations, rules, orders, procurement, and other internal policies and practices, and outreach activities that either facially discriminate against or otherwise discourage or disadvantage the participation of faith-based and other community organizations in Federal programs;
(b) coordinate a comprehensive agency effort to incorporate faith-based and other community organizations in agency programs and initiatives to the greatest extent possible;
(c) propose initiatives to remove barriers identified pursuant to section 3(a) of this order, including but not limited to reform of regulations, procurement, and other internal policies and practices, and outreach activities;
(d) propose the development of innovative pilot and demonstration programs to increase the participation of faith-based and other community organizations in Federal as well as State and local initiatives; andStart Printed Page 31510
(e) develop and coordinate agency outreach efforts to disseminate information more effectively to faith-based and other community organizations with respect to programming changes, contracting opportunities, and other agency initiatives, including but not limited to Web and Internet resources.
Sec. 4.
Reporting Requirements. (a) Report. Not later than 180 days from the date of this order and annually thereafter, each of the three Centers described in section 1 of this order shall prepare and submit a report to the President through the White House OFBCI.
(b) Contents. The report shall include a description of the agency's efforts in carrying out its responsibilities under this order, including but not limited to:
(i) a comprehensive analysis of the barriers to the full participation of faith-based and other community organizations in the delivery of social and community services identified pursuant to section 3(a) of this order and the proposed strategies to eliminate those barriers; and
(ii) a summary of the technical assistance and other information that will be available to faith-based and other community organizations regarding the program activities of the agency and the preparation of applications or proposals for grants, cooperative agreements, contracts, and procurement.
(c) Performance Indicators. The first report, filed pursuant to section 4(a) of this order, shall include annual performance indicators and measurable objectives for agency action. Each report filed thereafter shall measure the agency's performance against the objectives set forth in the initial report.
Sec. 5.
Responsibilities of the Secretaries of Commerce and Veterans Affairs and the Administrator of the Small Business Administration. The Secretaries and the Administrator shall:
(a) designate an employee within their respective agencies to serve as the liaison and point of contact with the White House OFBCI; and
(b) cooperate with the White House OFBCI and provide such information, support, and assistance to the White House OFBCI as it may request, to the extent permitted by law.
Sec. 6.
Administration and Judicial Review. (a) The agency actions directed by this executive order shall be carried out subject to the availability of appropriations and to the extent permitted by law.
(b) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities or entities, its officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 32245
Executive Order 13343 of June 6, 2004
Providing for the Closing of Government Departments and Agencies on June 11, 2004
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. All executive departments, independent establishments, and other governmental agencies shall be closed on June 11, 2004, as a mark of respect for Ronald Reagan, the fortieth President of the United States. That day shall be considered as falling within the scope of Executive Order 11582 of February 11, 1971, and of 5 U.S.C. 5546 and 6103(b) and other similar statutes insofar as they relate to the pay and leave of employees of the United States.
Sec. 2. The first sentence of section 1 of this order shall not apply to those offices and installations, or parts thereof, in the Department of State, the Department of Defense, the Department of Justice, the Department of Homeland Security, or other departments, independent establishments, and governmental agencies that the heads thereof determine should remain open for reasons of national security or defense or other essential public business.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 41747Executive Order 13344 of July 7, 2004
Amending Executive Order 13261 on the Order of Succession in the Environmental Protection Agency
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, 5 U.S.C. 3345, et seq., it is hereby ordered that Executive Order 13261 of March 19, 2002, is amended as follows:
Section 1. In section 2, subsections (a), (b), and (c) are deleted and replaced with the following new subsections (a), (b), and (c):
(a) Assistant Administrator, Office of Solid Waste;
(b) Assistant Administrator for Toxic Substances;
(c) Assistant Administrator (Air and Radiation).
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13345 of July 8, 2004
Assigning Foreign Affairs Functions and Implementing the Enterprise for the Americas Initiative and the Tropical Forest Conservation Act
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954 (ATDA Act), as amended, the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (Foreign Assistance Act), as amended, and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Functions to be Performed by the Secretary of the Treasury. (a) The Secretary of the Treasury is hereby designated to perform the functions of the President under the following provisions of law:
(1) sections 603(b), 604(a), and 611 of the ATDA Act (7 U.S.C. 1738b(b), 1738c(a), and 1738j); and
(2) sections 703, 704(a), 805(b), 806(a), 807(a), 808(a), and 812 of the Foreign Assistance Act (22 U.S.C. 2430b, 2430c(a), 2431c(b), 2431d(a), 2431e(a), 2431f(a), and 2431j).
(b) The Secretary of the Treasury shall:
(1)(A) make determinations under the provisions of sections 703(b) and 805(b) of the Foreign Assistance Act in accordance with any recommendations received from the Secretary of State with respect to subsections 703(a)(1)-703(a)(4) and the corresponding recommendations under section 805(a)(1) of that Act; and
(B) make determinations under the provisions of section 805(b) of the Foreign Assistance Act in accordance with any recommendations from the Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) with respect to section 803(5)(B) of that Act;
(2) exercise the functions under the provisions listed in section 1(a)(1) of this order in consultation with the Secretary of State and with the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial Policies (Council) established by Executive Order 11269 of February 14, 1966;
(3) consult, as appropriate, with the Secretary of State, the Administrator of USAID, the Council, the Secretary of Agriculture, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality, the Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy, and the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers in the performance of all other functions under the provisions listed in section 1(a) of this order.
Sec. 2.
Functions to be Performed by the Secretary of State. (a) The Secretary of State is hereby designated to perform the functions of the President under sections 607 and 614 of the ATDA Act (7 U.S.C. 1738f and 1738m) and section 813(a) of the Foreign Assistance Act (22 U.S.C. 2431k).
(b) The Secretary of State shall consult, as appropriate, with the Secretary of the Treasury and the Administrator of USAID, in the performance of functions under the provisions listed in subsection 2(a) of this order.
(c) The Secretary of State shall consult, as appropriate, in the performance of functions under section 607 of the ATDA Act, with the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of Commerce, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Start Printed Page 41902Quality, and the heads of such other executive departments and agencies as the Secretary of State determines appropriate.
(d) The Secretary of State is hereby designated to receive advice or supplemental views on the President's behalf consistent with the following provisions of law:
(1) section 610(c)(1) of the ATDA Act (7 U.S.C. 1738i(c)(1)); and
(2) section 813(b) of the Foreign Assistance Act (22 U.S.C. 2431k).
Sec. 3.
Recommendation by USAID. The Administrator of USAID shall make recommendations with respect to 803(5)(B) of the Foreign Assistance Act (22 U.S.C. 2431a(5)(B), in cooperation with the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of State.
Sec. 4.
Government Appointees to the Enterprise for the Americas Board. (a) Pursuant to section 610(b)(1)(A) of the ATDA Act (7 U.S.C. 1738i(b)(1)(A) and section 811(b)(1)(A) and (b)(2) of the Foreign Assistance Act (22 U.S.C. 2431i(b)(1)(A) and (b)(2)), the following officers or employees of the United States are hereby designated to serve as representatives on the Enterprise for the Americas Board:
(i) the designee of the Secretary of State, who shall be the chairperson of the Board;
(ii) the designee of the Secretary of the Treasury;
(iii) two designees of the Secretary of Agriculture, one of whom shall be an officer or employee of the United States Forest Service International Programs Office with experience in international forestry matters, and the other shall be an officer or employee of the Foreign Agricultural Service;
(iv) the designee of the Secretary of the Interior;
(v) the designee of the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency;
(vi) the designee of the Administrator of USAID, who shall be the vice chairperson of the Board; and
(vii) the designee of the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality.
(b) The Board shall permit the following officers or employees of the United States to attend and observe a Board meeting:
(i) a designee of the Secretary of Commerce; and
(ii) a designee of the head of any executive department or agency, if the meeting will relate to matters relevant to the activities of such executive department or agency.
(c) An officer of the United States listed in subsections 4(a) and 4(b) shall make a designation for purposes of those subsections in writing submitted to the Secretary of State and shall change any such designation in the same manner. The authority to make such a designation may not be delegated.
(d) The Secretary of State may, after consultation with the officers of the United States listed in subsection 4(b) and the Attorney General, as appropriate, establish such procedures as may be necessary to provide for the governance and administration of the Board.
Sec. 5.
Guidance for the Performance of Functions. In performing functions under this order, officers of the United States:
(a) shall ensure that all actions taken by them are consistent with the President's constitutional authority to (i) conduct the foreign affairs of the United States, including the commencement, conduct, and termination of negotiations with foreign countries and international organizations, (ii) withhold information the disclosure of which could impair the foreign relations, the national security, the deliberative processes of the Executive, or the performance of the Executive's constitutional duties, (iii) recommend for congressional consideration such measures as the President may judge necessary or expedient, and (iv) supervise the unitary executive branch;Start Printed Page 41903
(b) may further assign functions assigned by this order to officers of any department or agency within the executive branch to the extent permitted by law except as provided in subsection 4(c) of this order and such further assignment shall be published in the Federal Register; and
(c) shall consult the Attorney General as appropriate in implementing this section.
Sec. 6.
Revocation of Executive Orders. The following Executive Orders are hereby revoked:
(a) Executive Order 12757 of March 19, 1991;
(b) Executive Order 12823 of December 3, 1992;
(c) Executive Order 13028 of December 3, 1996; and
(d) Executive Order 13131 of July 22, 1999.
Sec. 7.
Judicial Review. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 41905
Executive Order 13346 of July 8, 2004
Delegation of Certain Waiver, Determination, Certification, Recommendation, and Reporting Functions
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 301 of title 3, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. The functions of the President in making certain waivers, determinations, certifications, recommendations, and reports to the Congress are assigned as follows:
(a) The Secretary of State is authorized to make waivers, determinations, certifications, and recommendations, and to undertake related reporting, as described in:
(i) Section 402(d)(1) of the Trade Act of 1974, as amended (19 U.S.C. 2432(d)(1)), with respect to the extension of Jackson-Vanik waivers;
(ii) Section 609 of Division A of the Omnibus Consolidated and Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act, 1999 (Public Law 105-277) as continued in effect by section 612 of Division B of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2004 (Public Law 108-199) with respect to cooperation related to persons missing in action and prisoners of war; and
(iii) Section 102(a)(2) of the Arms Export Control Act, as amended (22 U.S.C. 2799aa-1(a)), with respect to any Presidential determination under section 102(a)(1) that is also the subject of a determination and certification by the President pursuant to section 102(a)(2).
(b) The United States Trade Representative shall submit the report relating to sub-Saharan Africa under section 106 of the African Growth and Opportunity Act (Public Law 106-200, title 1).
Sec. 2. The functions of the President in making certifications to the Congress consistent with the resolution of advice and consent to ratification of the Chemical Weapons Convention adopted by the Senate on April 24, 1997 (Resolution) are assigned as follows:
(a) The Secretary of State is authorized to make a certification consistent with section 2(7)(C)(i) of the Resolution with respect to the effectiveness and viability of the Australia Group.
(b) The Secretary of Commerce is authorized to make a certification consistent with section 2(9) of the Resolution with respect to the interests of certain firms in the United States.
Sec. 3. Executive Order 12163 of September 29, 1979, as amended, is further amended, in section 1-100(a), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (12) and inserting a semicolon, and by inserting the following new paragraphs:
“(13) title II of the Foreign Operations, Export Financing, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2002 (Public Law 107-115), under the heading “Assistance for the Independent States of the Former Soviet Union,” in subsections (g)(4) and (6);”;
“(14) section 512 of Division D of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2004 (Public Law 108-199);”;
“(15) sections 5(c) and 6 of the Anglo-Irish Agreement Support Act of 1986 (Public Law 99-415), as amended.”.Start Printed Page 41906
Sec. 4. Executive Order 13277 of November 19, 2002, is amended in section 1(b)(3) by adding after the phrase “Section 2105(a)(1)” the terms “(A) and (C)”.
Sec. 5. References in this order to provisions of any Act shall be deemed to include references to any provision of law that is the same or substantially the same as such provisions.
Sec. 6. In carrying out sections 1 and 2 of this order, officers of the United States shall ensure that all actions taken by them are consistent with the President's constitutional authority to: (a) conduct the foreign affairs of the United States; (b) withhold information the disclosure of which could impair the foreign relations, the national security, the deliberative processes of the Executive, or the performance of the Executive's constitutional duties; (c) recommend for congressional consideration such measures as the President may judge necessary and expedient; and (d) supervise the unitary executive branch.
Sec. 7. Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
Sec. 8. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13347 of July 22, 2004
Individuals With Disabilities in Emergency Preparedness
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to strengthen emergency preparedness with respect to individuals with disabilities, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. To ensure that the Federal Government appropriately supports safety and security for individuals with disabilities in situations involving disasters, including earthquakes, tornadoes, fires, floods, hurricanes, and acts of terrorism, it shall be the policy of the United States that executive departments and agencies of the Federal Government (agencies):
(a) consider, in their emergency preparedness planning, the unique needs of agency employees with disabilities and individuals with disabilities whom the agency serves;
(b) encourage, including through the provision of technical assistance, as appropriate, consideration of the unique needs of employees and individuals with disabilities served by State, local, and tribal governments and private organizations and individuals in emergency preparedness planning; and
(c) facilitate cooperation among Federal, State, local, and tribal governments and private organizations and individuals in the implementation of emergency preparedness plans as they relate to individuals with disabilities.
Sec. 2.
Establishment of Council. (a) There is hereby established, within the Department of Homeland Security for administrative purposes, the Interagency Coordinating Council on Emergency Preparedness and Individuals with Disabilities (the “Council”). The Council shall consist exclusively of the following members or their designees:
(i)
the heads of executive departments, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Administrator of General Services, the Director of the Office of Personnel Management, and the Commissioner of Social Security; and
(ii)
any other agency head as the Secretary of Homeland Security may, with the concurrence of the agency head, designate.
(b) The Secretary of Homeland Security shall chair the Council, convene and preside at its meetings, determine its agenda, direct its work, and, as appropriate to particular subject matters, establish and direct subgroups of the Council, which shall consist exclusively of Council members.
(c) A member of the Council may designate, to perform the Council functions of the member, an employee of the member's department or agency who is either an officer of the United States appointed by the President, or a full-time employee serving in a position with pay equal to or greater than the minimum rate payable for GS-15 of the General Schedule.
Sec. 3.
Functions of Council. (a) The Council shall:
(i)
coordinate implementation by agencies of the policy set forth in section 1 of this order;Start Printed Page 44574
(ii)
whenever the Council obtains in the performance of its functions information or advice from any individual who is not a full-time or permanent part-time Federal employee, obtain such information and advice only in a manner that seeks individual advice and does not involve collective judgment or consensus advice or deliberation; and
(iii)
at the request of any agency head (or the agency head's designee under section 2(c) of this order) who is a member of the Council, unless the Secretary of Homeland Security declines the request, promptly review and provide advice, for the purpose of furthering the policy set forth in section 1, on a proposed action by that agency.
(b) The Council shall submit to the President each year beginning 1 year after the date of this order, through the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security, a report that describes:
(i)
the achievements of the Council in implementing the policy set forth in section 1;
(ii)
the best practices among Federal, State, local, and tribal governments and private organizations and individuals for emergency preparedness planning with respect to individuals with disabilities; and
(iii)
recommendations of the Council for advancing the policy set forth in section 1.
Sec. 4.
General. (a) To the extent permitted by law:
(i)
agencies shall assist and provide information to the Council for the performance of its functions under this order; and
(ii)
the Department of Homeland Security shall provide funding and administrative support for the Council.
(b) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(c) This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13348 of July 22, 2004
Blocking Property of Certain Persons and Prohibiting the Importation of Certain Goods from Liberia
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) (NEA), section 5 of the United Nations Participation Act, as amended (22 U.S.C. 287c) (UNPA), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and in view of United Nations Security Council Resolutions 1521 of December 22, 2003, and 1532 of March 12, 2004,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, note that the actions and policies of former Liberian President Charles Taylor and other persons, in particular their unlawful depletion of Liberian resources and their removal from Liberia and secreting of Liberian funds and property, have undermined Liberia's transition to democracy and the orderly development of its political, administrative, and economic institutions and resources. I further note that the Comprehensive Peace Agreement signed on August 18, 2003, and the related ceasefire have not yet been universally implemented throughout Liberia, and that the illicit trade in round logs and timber products is linked to the proliferation of and trafficking in illegal arms, which perpetuate the Liberian conflict and fuel and exacerbate other conflicts throughout West Africa. I find that the actions, policies, and circumstances described above constitute an unusual and extraordinary threat to the foreign policy of the United States and hereby declare a national emergency to deal with that threat. To address that threat, I hereby order:
Section 1. (a) Except to the extent provided in section 203(b)(1), (3), and (4) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(1), (3), and (4)), or regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date of this order, all property and interests in property of the following persons, that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of United States persons, are blocked and may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in:
(i)
the persons listed in the Annex to this order; and
(ii)
any person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State:
(A)
to be or have been an immediate family member of Charles Taylor;
(B)
to have been a senior official of the former Liberian regime headed by Charles Taylor or otherwise to have been or be a close ally or associate of Charles Taylor or the former Liberian regime;
(C)
to have materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services in support of, the unlawful depletion of Liberian resources, the removal of Liberian resources from that country, and the secreting of Liberian funds and property by any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order; orStart Printed Page 44886
(D)
to be owned or controlled by, or acting or purporting to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order.
(b) I hereby determine that the making of donations of the type of articles specified in section 203(b)(2) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)) by, to, or for the benefit of, any person whose property or interests in property are blocked pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section would seriously impair my ability to deal with the national emergency declared in this order, and I hereby prohibit such donations as provided by paragraph (a) of this section.
(c) The prohibitions in paragraph (a) of this section include, but are not limited to,
(i) the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of, any person whose property or interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order, and
(ii) the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.
Sec. 2. Except to the extent provided in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date of this order, the direct or indirect importation into the United States of any round log or timber product originating in Liberia is prohibited.
Sec. 3. (a) Any transaction by a United States person or within the United States that evades or avoids, has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
(b) Any conspiracy formed to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
Sec. 4. For purposes of this order: (a) the term “person” means an individual or entity;
(b) the term “entity” means a partnership, association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization;
(c) the term “United States person” means any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States; and
(d) the term “round log or timber product” means any product classifiable in Chapter 44 of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States.
Sec. 5. For those persons whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to section 1 of this order who might have a constitutional presence in the United States, I find that because of the ability to transfer funds or other assets instantaneously, prior notice to such persons of measures to be taken pursuant to this order would render these measures ineffectual. I therefore determine that for these measures to be effective in addressing the national emergency declared in this order, there need be no prior notice of a listing or determination made pursuant to section 1 of this order.
Sec. 6. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA and UNPA as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government, consistent with applicable law. All agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order and, where appropriate, to advise the Secretary of the Treasury in a timely manner of the measures taken.Start Printed Page 44887
Sec. 7. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to submit the recurring and final reports to the Congress on the national emergency declared in this order, consistent with section 401(c) of NEA, 50 U.S.C. 1641(c), and section 204(c) of IEEPA, 50 U.S.C. 1703(c).
Sec. 8. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to determine, subsequent to the issuance of this order, that circumstances no longer warrant the inclusion of a person in the Annex to this order and that the property and interests in property of that person are therefore no longer blocked pursuant to section 1 of this order.
Sec. 9. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
Sec. 10. This order is effective at 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time on July 23, 2004.
Sec. 11. This order shall be transmitted to the Congress and published in the Federal Register.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
July 22, 2004.
Start Printed Page 44888
Start Printed Page 44889
Start Printed Page 44890
Start Printed Page 44891
Executive Order 13349 of July 23, 2004
Amending Executive Order 13226 To Designate the President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology To Serve as the National Nanotechnology Advisory Panel
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the 21st Century Nanotechnology Research and Development Act (Public Law 108-153), and in order to designate the National Nanotechnology Advisory Panel pursuant to section 4(a) of that Act, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Executive Order 13226 of September 30, 2001, as amended, is further amended by adding a new section 2(c), to read as follows:
“(c) PCAST shall serve as the National Nanotechnology Advisory Panel under section 4 of the 21st Century Nanotechnology Research and Development Act (Public Law 108-153) (Act). Nothing in this Order shall be construed to require the National Nanotechnology Advisory Panel to comply with any requirement from which it is exempted by section 4(f) of the Act.”
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13350 of July 29, 2004
Termination of Emergency Declared in Executive Order 12722 With Respect to Iraq and Modification of Executive Order 13290, Executive Order 13303, and Executive Order 13315
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.)(IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.)(NEA), section 5 of the United Nations Participation Act, as amended (22 U.S.C. 287c)(UNPA), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, have determined that the situation that gave rise to the declaration of a national emergency with respect to Iraq in Executive Order 12722 of August 2, 1990, has been significantly altered by the removal of the regime of Saddam Hussein and other developments. I hereby terminate the national emergency declared in Executive Order 12722, revoke that Executive Order and Executive Order 12724 of August 9, 1990, Executive Order 12734 of November 14, 1990, Executive Order 12743 of January 18, 1991, Executive Order 12751 of February 14, 1991, and Executive Order 12817 of October 21, 1992, that are based on that national emergency. I hereby amend Executive Order 13290 of March 20, 2003, so that the authorities therein remain in effect based on the national emergency I declared in Executive Order 13303 of May 22, 2003, and expanded in Executive Order 13315 of August 28, 2003. At the same time, and in order to take additional steps to deal with the national emergency that I declared in Executive Order 13303, and expanded in Executive Order 13315, with respect to the unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States posed by obstacles to the orderly reconstruction of Iraq, the restoration and maintenance of peace and security in that country, and the development of political, administrative and economic institutions in Iraq, I hereby order:
Section 1. Pursuant to section 202(a) of the NEA (50 U.S.C. 1622(a)), termination of the national emergency declared in Executive Order 12722 shall not affect any action taken or proceeding pending but not finally concluded or determined as of the effective date of this order, any action or proceeding based on any act committed prior to such date, or any rights or duties that matured or penalties that were incurred prior to such date. Pursuant to section 207(a) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1706(a)), and subject to such regulations, orders, directives, or licenses as may be issued pursuant to this order, I hereby determine that the continuation of prohibitions with regard to transactions involving property blocked pursuant to Executive Orders 12722 or 12724 that continues to be blocked as of the effective date of this order is necessary on account of claims involving Iraq.
Sec. 2. The Annex to Executive Order 13315 is replaced and superseded in its entirety by the Annex to this order.
Sec. 3. I hereby amend Executive Order 13290 by removing “the national emergency declared in Executive Order 12722 of August 2, 1990” and replacing it with “the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13303 of March 20, 2003, and expanded in Executive Order 13315 of August 28, 2003”.Start Printed Page 46056
Sec. 4. Unless licensed or otherwise authorized pursuant to this order or otherwise consistent with U.S. law, the trade in or transfer of ownership or possession of Iraqi cultural property or other items of archeological, historical, cultural, rare scientific, and religious importance that were illegally removed, or for which a reasonable suspicion exists that they were illegally removed, from the Iraq National Museum, the National Library, and other locations in Iraq since August 6, 1990, is prohibited.
Sec. 5. I hereby determine that the making of donations of the type specified in section 203(b)(2) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)) by or to persons determined to be subject to the sanctions imposed by Executive Order 13315 or by this order would seriously impair my ability to deal with the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13303, and expanded by Executive Order 13315, or would endanger the Armed Forces of the United States that are engaged in hostilities, and I hereby prohibit such donations as provided in section 1 of Executive Order 13315 as amended by this order.
Sec. 6. For those persons listed in the Annex to this order or determined to be subject to Executive Order 13315 or this order who might have a constitutional presence in the United States, I find that because of the ability to transfer funds or other assets instantaneously, prior notice to such persons of measures to be taken pursuant to this order would render these measures ineffectual. I therefore determine that for these measures to be effective in addressing the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13303, and expanded by Executive Order 13315, there need be no prior notice of a listing or determination made pursuant to Executive Order 13315 or this order.
Sec. 7. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA and UNPA as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government consistent with applicable law. All agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order.
Sec. 8. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is authorized to determine subsequent to the issuance of the order, that circumstances no longer warrant the inclusion of a person in the Annex to this order and that such person is therefore no longer covered within the scope of the order.
Sec. 9. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, officers or employees, or any other person.Start Printed Page 46057
Sec. 10. This order is effective at 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time on July 30, 2004. This order shall be transmitted to the Congress and published in the Federal Register.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
July 29, 2004.
Start Printed Page 46058
Start Printed Page 46059
Start Printed Page 46060
Start Printed Page 46061
Start Printed Page 46062
Start Printed Page 46063
Start Printed Page 46064
Start Printed Page 46065
Start Printed Page 46066
Start Printed Page 46067
Executive Order 13351 of August 9, 2004
Establishing an Emergency Board To Investigate a Dispute Between the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority and Its Conductors Represented by the United Transportation Union
A dispute exists between the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority and its conductors represented by the United Transportation Union.
The dispute has not heretofore been adjusted under the provisions of the Railway Labor Act, as amended, 45 U.S.C. 151-188 (the “Act”).
A first emergency board to investigate and report on the dispute was established on April 12, 2004, by Executive Order 13334 of April 10, 2004. The emergency board terminated upon issuance of its report. Subsequently, its recommendations were not accepted by the parties.
A party empowered by the Act has requested that the President establish a second emergency board pursuant to section 9A of the Act (45 U.S.C. 159a).
Section 9A(e) of the Act provides that the President, upon such request, shall appoint a second emergency board to investigate and report on the dispute.
NOW, THEREFORE, by the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, including section 9A of the Act, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment of Emergency Board (“Board”). There is established, effective August 10, 2004, a Board of three members to be appointed by the President to investigate and report on this dispute. No member shall be pecuniarily or otherwise interested in any organization of railroad employees or any carrier. The Board shall perform its functions subject to the availability of funds.
Sec. 2.
Report. Within 30 days after the creation of the Board, the parties to the dispute shall submit to the Board final offers for settlement of the dispute. Within 30 days after the submission of final offers for settlement of the dispute, the Board shall submit a report to the President setting forth its selection of the most reasonable offer.
Sec. 3.
Maintaining Conditions. As provided by section 9A(h) of the Act, from the time a request to establish a second emergency board is made until 60 days after the Board submits its report to the President, the parties to the controversy shall make no change in the conditions out of which the dispute arose except by agreement of the parties.
Sec. 4.
Records Maintenance. The records and files of the Board are records of the Office of the President and upon the Board's termination shall be maintained in the physical custody of the National Mediation Board.Start Printed Page 50048
Sec. 5.
Expiration. The Board shall terminate upon the submission of the report provided for in section 2 of this order.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 52989
Executive Order 13352 of August 26, 2004
Facilitation of Cooperative Conservation
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Purpose. The purpose of this order is to ensure that the Departments of the Interior, Agriculture, Commerce, and Defense and the Environmental Protection Agency implement laws relating to the environment and natural resources in a manner that promotes cooperative conservation, with an emphasis on appropriate inclusion of local participation in Federal decisionmaking, in accordance with their respective agency missions, policies, and regulations.
Sec. 2.
Definition. As used in this order, the term “cooperative conservation” means actions that relate to use, enhancement, and enjoyment of natural resources, protection of the environment, or both, and that involve collaborative activity among Federal, State, local, and tribal governments, private for-profit and nonprofit institutions, other nongovernmental entities and individuals.
Sec. 3.
Federal Activities. To carry out the purpose of this order, the Secretaries of the Interior, Agriculture, Commerce, and Defense and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall, to the extent permitted by law and subject to the availability of appropriations and in coordination with each other as appropriate:
(a) carry out the programs, projects, and activities of the agency that they respectively head that implement laws relating to the environment and natural resources in a manner that:
(i) facilitates cooperative conservation;
(ii) takes appropriate account of and respects the interests of persons with ownership or other legally recognized interests in land and other natural resources;
(iii) properly accommodates local participation in Federal decisionmaking; and
(iv) provides that the programs, projects, and activities are consistent with protecting public health and safety;
(b) report annually to the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality on actions taken to implement this order; and
(c) provide funding to the Office of Environmental Quality Management Fund (42 U.S.C. 4375) for the Conference for which section 4 of this order provides.
Sec. 4.
White House Conference on Cooperative Conservation. The Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality shall, to the extent permitted by law and subject to the availability of appropriations:
(a) convene not later than 1 year after the date of this order, and thereafter at such times as the Chairman deems appropriate, a White House Conference on Cooperative Conservation (Conference) to facilitate the exchange of information and advice relating to (i) cooperative conservation and (ii) means for achievement of the purpose of this order; and
(b) ensure that the Conference obtains information in a manner that seeks from Conference participants their individual advice and does not involve collective judgment or consensus advice or deliberation.Start Printed Page 52990
Sec. 5.
General Provision. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities or entities, its officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13353 of August 27, 2004
Establishing the President's Board on Safeguarding
Americans' Civil Liberties
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to further strengthen protections for the rights of Americans in the effective performance of national security and homeland security functions, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. The United States Government has a solemn obligation, and shall continue fully, to protect the legal rights of all Americans, including freedoms, civil liberties, and information privacy guaranteed by Federal law, in the effective performance of national security and homeland security functions.
Sec. 2.
Establishment of Board. To advance the policy set forth in section 1 of this order (Policy), there is hereby established the President's Board on Safeguarding Americans' Civil Liberties (Board). The Board shall be part of the Department of Justice for administrative purposes.
Sec. 3.
Functions. The Board shall:
(a)
(i) advise the President on effective means to implement the Policy, and (ii) keep the President informed of the implementation of the Policy;
(b)
periodically request reports from Federal departments and agencies relating to policies and procedures that ensure implementation of the Policy;
(c)
recommend to the President policies, guidelines and other administrative actions, technologies, and legislation, as necessary to implement the Policy;
(d)
at the request of the head of any Federal department or agency, unless the Chair, after consultation with the Vice Chair, declines the request, promptly review and provide advice on a policy or action of that department or agency that implicates the Policy;
(e)
obtain information and advice relating to the Policy from representatives of entities or individuals outside the executive branch of the Federal Government in a manner that seeks their individual advice and does not involve collective judgment or consensus advice or deliberation;
(f)
refer, consistent with section 535 of title 28, United States Code, credible information pertaining to possible violations of law relating to the Policy by any Federal employee or official to the appropriate office for prompt investigation;
(g)
take steps to enhance cooperation and coordination among Federal departments and agencies in the implementation of the Policy, including but not limited to working with the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and other officers of the United States to review and assist in the coordination of guidelines and policies concerning national security and homeland security efforts, such as information collection and sharing; and
(h)
undertake other efforts to protect the legal rights of all Americans, including freedoms, civil liberties, and information privacy guaranteed by Federal law, as the President may direct.
Upon the recommendation of the Board, the Attorney General or the Secretary of Homeland Security may establish one or more committees that include Start Printed Page 53586individuals from outside the executive branch of the Federal Government, in accordance with applicable law, to advise the Board on specific issues relating to the Policy. Any such committee shall carry out its functions separately from the Board.
Sec. 4.
Membership and Operation. The Board shall consist exclusively of the following:
(a)
the Deputy Attorney General, who shall serve as Chair;
(b)
the Under Secretary for Border and Transportation Security, Department of Homeland Security, who shall serve as Vice Chair;
(c)
the Assistant Attorney General (Civil Rights Division);
(d)
the Assistant Attorney General (Office of Legal Policy);
(e)
the Counsel for Intelligence Policy, Department of Justice;
(f)
the Chair of the Privacy Council, Federal Bureau of Investigation;
(g)
the Assistant Secretary for Information Analysis, Department of Homeland Security;
(h)
the Assistant Secretary (Policy), Directorate of Border and Transportation Security, Department of Homeland Security;
(i)
the Officer for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties, Department of Homeland Security;
(j)
the Privacy Officer, Department of Homeland Security;
(k)
the Under Secretary for Enforcement, Department of the Treasury;
(l)
the Assistant Secretary (Terrorist Financing), Department of the Treasury;
(m)
the General Counsel, Office of Management and Budget;
(n)
the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence for Community Management;
(o)
the General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency;
(p)
the General Counsel, National Security Agency;
(q)
the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence;
(r)
the General Counsel of the Department of Defense;
(s)
the Legal Adviser, Department of State;
(t)
the Director, Terrorist Threat Integration Center; and
(u)
such other officers of the United States as the Deputy Attorney General may from time to time designate.
A member of the Board may designate, to perform the Board or Board subgroup functions of the member, any person who is part of such member's department or agency and who is either (i) an officer of the United States appointed by the President, or (ii) a member of the Senior Executive Service or the Senior Intelligence Service. The Chair, after consultation with the Vice Chair, shall convene and preside at meetings of the Board, determine its agenda, direct its work, and, as appropriate to deal with particular subject matters, establish and direct subgroups of the Board that shall consist exclusively of members of the Board. The Chair may invite, in his discretion, officers or employees of other departments or agencies to participate in the work of the Board. The Chair shall convene the first meeting of the Board within 20 days after the date of this order and shall thereafter convene meetings of the Board at such times as the Chair, after consultation with the Vice Chair, deems appropriate. The Deputy Attorney General shall designate an official of the Department of Justice to serve as the Executive Director of the Board.
Sec. 5.
Cooperation. To the extent permitted by law, all Federal departments and agencies shall cooperate with the Board and provide the Board with such information, support, and assistance as the Board, through the Chair, may request.
Sec. 6.
Administration. Consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations, the Department of Justice shall provide the funding and administrative support for the Board necessary to implement this order.
Sec. 7.
General Provisions. (a) This order shall not be construed to impair or otherwise affect the authorities of any department, agency, instrumentality, Start Printed Page 53587officer, or employee of the United States under applicable law, including the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(b) This order shall be implemented in a manner consistent with applicable laws and Executive Orders concerning protection of information, including those for the protection of intelligence sources and methods, law enforcement information, and classified national security information, and the Privacy Act of 1974, as amended (5 U.S.C. 552a).
(c) This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by a party against the United States, or any of its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, entities, officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 53589
Executive Order 13354 of August 27, 2004
National Counterterrorism Center
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and laws of the United States of America, including section 103(c)(8) of the National Security Act of 1947, as amended (Act), and to protect the security of the United States through strengthened intelligence analysis and strategic planning and intelligence support to operations to counter transnational terrorist threats against the territory, people, and interests of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. (a) To the maximum extent consistent with applicable law, agencies shall give the highest priority to (i) the detection, prevention, disruption, preemption, and mitigation of the effects of transnational terrorist activities against the territory, people, and interests of the United States of America, (ii) the interchange of terrorism information among agencies, (iii) the interchange of terrorism information between agencies and appropriate authorities of States and local governments, and (iv) the protection of the ability of agencies to acquire additional such information.
(b) Agencies shall protect the freedom, information privacy, and other legal rights of Americans in the conduct of activities implementing section 1(a) of this order.
Sec. 2.
Establishment of National Counterterrorism Center. (a) There is hereby established a National Counterterrorism Center (Center).
(b) A Director of the Center shall supervise the Center.
(c) The Director of the Center shall be appointed by the Director of Central Intelligence with the approval of the President.
(d) The Director of Central Intelligence shall have authority, direction, and control over the Center and the Director of the Center.
Sec. 3.
Functions of the Center. The Center shall have the following functions:
(a) serve as the primary organization in the United States Government for analyzing and integrating all intelligence possessed or acquired by the United States Government pertaining to terrorism and counterterrorism, excepting purely domestic counterterrorism information. The Center may, consistent with applicable law, receive, retain, and disseminate information from any Federal, State, or local government, or other source necessary to fulfill its responsibilities concerning the policy set forth in section 1 of this order; and agencies authorized to conduct counterterrorism activities may query Center data for any information to assist in their respective responsibilities;
(b) conduct strategic operational planning for counterterrorism activities, integrating all instruments of national power, including diplomatic, financial, military, intelligence, homeland security, and law enforcement activities within and among agencies;
(c) assign operational responsibilities to lead agencies for counterterrorism activities that are consistent with applicable law and that support strategic plans to counter terrorism. The Center shall ensure that agencies have access to and receive intelligence needed to accomplish their assigned activities. The Center shall not direct the execution of operations. Agencies shall inform the National Security Council and the Homeland Security Council of any objections to designations and assignments made by the Center in the planning and coordination of counterterrorism activities;Start Printed Page 53590
(d) serve as the central and shared knowledge bank on known and suspected terrorists and international terror groups, as well as their goals, strategies, capabilities, and networks of contacts and support; and
(e) ensure that agencies, as appropriate, have access to and receive all-source intelligence support needed to execute their counterterrorism plans or perform independent, alternative analysis.
Sec. 4.
Duties of the Director of Central Intelligence. The Director of Central Intelligence shall:
(a) exercise the authority available by law to the Director of Central Intelligence to implement this order, including, as appropriate, the authority set forth in section 102(e)(2)(H) of the Act;
(b) report to the President on the implementation of this order, within 120 days after the date of this order and thereafter not less often than annually, including an assessment by the Director of Central Intelligence of:
(1)
the effectiveness of the United States in implementing the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, to the extent execution of that policy is within the responsibilities of the Director of Central Intelligence;
(2)
the effectiveness of the Center in the implementation of the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, to the extent execution of that policy is within the responsibilities of the Director of Central Intelligence; and
(3)
the cooperation of the heads of agencies in the implementation of this order; and
(c) ensure the performance of all-source intelligence analysis that, among other qualities, routinely considers and presents alternative analytical views to the President, the Vice President in the performance of executive functions, and other officials of the executive branch as appropriate.
Sec. 5.
Duties of the Director of the Center. In implementing the policy set forth in section 1 of this order and ensuring that the Center effectively performs the functions set forth in section 3 of this order, the Director of the Center shall:
(a) access, as deemed necessary by the Director of the Center for the performance of the Center's functions, information to which the Director of the Center is granted access by section 6 of this order;
(b) correlate, analyze, evaluate, integrate, and produce reports on terrorism information;
(c) disseminate transnational terrorism information, including current terrorism threat analysis, to the President, the Vice President in the performance of Executive functions, the Secretaries of State, Defense, and Homeland Security, the Attorney General, the Director of Central Intelligence, and other officials of the executive branch as appropriate;
(d) support the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of Justice, and other appropriate agencies, in fulfillment of their responsibility to disseminate terrorism information, consistent with applicable law, Executive Orders and other Presidential guidance, to State and local government officials, and other entities, and coordinate dissemination of terrorism information to foreign governments when approved by the Director of Central Intelligence;
(e) establish both within the Center, and between the Center and agencies, information systems and architectures for the effective access to and integration, dissemination, and use of terrorism information from whatever sources derived;
(f) undertake, as soon as the Director of Central Intelligence determines it to be practicable, all functions assigned to the Terrorist Threat Integration Center;Start Printed Page 53591
(g) consistent with priorities approved by the President, assist the Director of Central Intelligence in establishing requirements for the Intelligence Community for the collection of terrorism information, to include ensuring military force protection requirements are met;
(h) under the direction of the Director of Central Intelligence, and in consultation with heads of agencies with organizations in the Intelligence Community, identify, coordinate, and prioritize counterterrorism intelligence requirements for the Intelligence Community; and
(i) identify, together with relevant agencies, specific counterterrorism planning efforts to be initiated or accelerated to protect the national security.
Sec. 6.
Duties of the Heads of Agencies. (a) To implement the policy set forth in section 1 of this order:
(i)
the head of each agency that possesses or acquires terrorism information:
(A)
shall promptly give access to such information to the Director of the Center, unless prohibited by law (such as section 103(c)(7) of the Act or Executive Order 12958, as amended) or otherwise directed by the President;
(B)
shall cooperate in and facilitate the production of reports based on terrorism information with contents and formats that permit dissemination that maximizes the utility of the information in protecting the territory, people, and interests of the United States; and
(C)
shall cooperate with the Director of Central Intelligence in the preparation of the report to the President required by section 4 of this order; and
(ii)
the head of each agency that conducts diplomatic, financial, military, homeland security, intelligence, or law enforcement activities relating to counterterrorism shall keep the Director of the Center fully and currently informed of such activities, unless prohibited by law (such as section 103(c)(7) of the Act or Executive Order 12958, as amended) or otherwise directed by the President.
(b) The head of each agency shall, consistent with applicable law, make available to the Director of the Center such personnel, funding, and other resources as the Director of Central Intelligence, after consultation with the head of the agency and with the approval of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, may request. In order to ensure maximum information sharing consistent with applicable law, each agency representative to the Center, unless otherwise specified by the Director of Central Intelligence, shall operate under the authorities of the representative's agency.
Sec. 7.
Definitions. As used in this order:
(a) the term “agency” has the meaning set forth for the term “executive agency” in section 105 of title 5, United States Code, together with the Department of Homeland Security, but includes the Postal Rate Commission and the United States Postal Service and excludes the Government Accountability Office;
(b) the term “Intelligence Community” has the meaning set forth for that term in section 3.4(f) of Executive Order 12333 of December 4, 1981, as amended;
(c) the terms “local government”, “State”, and, when used in a geographical sense, “United States” have the meanings set forth for those terms in section 2 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 101); and
(d) the term “terrorism information” means all information, whether collected, produced, or distributed by intelligence, law enforcement, military, homeland security, or other United States Government activities, relating to (i) the existence, organization, capabilities, plans, intentions, vulnerabilities, means of finance or material support, or activities of foreign or international terrorist groups or individuals, or of domestic groups or individuals involved in transnational terrorism; (ii) threats posed by such groups or individuals to the United States, United States persons, or United Start Printed Page 53592States interests, or to those of other nations; (iii) communications of or by such groups or individuals; or (iv) information relating to groups or individuals reasonably believed to be assisting or associated with such groups or individuals.
Sec. 8.
General Provisions. (a) This order:
(i)
shall be implemented in a manner consistent with applicable law, including Federal law protecting the information privacy and other legal rights of Americans, and subject to the availability of appropriations;
(ii)
shall be implemented in a manner consistent with the authority of the principal officers of agencies as heads of their respective agencies, including under section 199 of the Revised Statutes (22 U.S.C. 2651), section 201 of the Department of Energy Reorganization Act (42 U.S.C. 7131), section 102(a) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 112(a)), and sections 301 of title 5, 113(b) and 162(b) of title 10, 503 of title 28, and 301(b) of title 31, United States Code; and
(iii)
shall not be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, and legislative proposals.
(b) This order and amendments made by this order are intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and are not intended to, and do not, create any rights or benefits, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 53593
Executive Order 13355 of August 27, 2004
Strengthened Management of the Intelligence Community
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and laws of the United States of America, including section 103(c)(8) of the National Security Act of 1947, as amended (Act), and in order to further strengthen the effective conduct of United States intelligence activities and protect the territory, people, and interests of the United States of America, including against terrorist attacks, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Strengthening the Authority of the Director of Central Intelligence. The Director of Central Intelligence (Director) shall perform the functions set forth in this order to ensure an enhanced joint, unified national intelligence effort to protect the national security of the United States. Such functions shall be in addition to those assigned to the Director by law, Executive Order, or Presidential directive.
Sec. 2.
Strengthened Role in National Intelligence. Executive Order 12333 of December 4, 1981, as amended, is further amended as follows:
(a) Subsection 1.5(a) is amended to read:
“(a)(1) Act as the principal adviser to the President for intelligence matters related to the national security;
“(2) Act as the principal adviser to the National Security Council and Homeland Security Council for intelligence matters related to the national security; and
(b) Subsection 1.5(b) is amended to read:
“(b)(1) Develop such objectives and guidance for the Intelligence Community necessary, in the Director's judgment, to ensure timely and effective collection, processing, analysis, and dissemination of intelligence, of whatever nature and from whatever source derived, concerning current and potential threats to the security of the United States and its interests, and to ensure that the National Foreign Intelligence Program (NFIP) is structured adequately to achieve these requirements; and
“(2) Working with the Intelligence Community, ensure that United States intelligence collection activities are integrated in: (i) collecting against enduring and emerging national security intelligence issues; (ii) maximizing the value to the national security; and (iii) ensuring that all collected data is available to the maximum extent practicable for integration, analysis, and dissemination to those who can act on, add value to, or otherwise apply it to mission needs.”
(c) Subsection 1.5(g) is amended to read:
“(g)(1) Establish common security and access standards for managing and handling intelligence systems, information, and products, with special emphasis on facilitating:
“(A) the fullest and most prompt sharing of information practicable, assigning the highest priority to detecting, preventing, preempting, and disrupting terrorist threats against our homeland, our people, our allies, and our interests; and
“(B) the establishment of interface standards for an interoperable information sharing enterprise that facilitates the automated sharing of intelligence information among agencies within the Intelligence Community.Start Printed Page 53594
“(2) (A) Establish, operate, and direct national centers with respect to matters determined by the President for purposes of this subparagraph to be of the highest national security priority, with the functions of analysis and planning (including planning for diplomatic, financial, military, intelligence, homeland security, and law enforcement activities, and integration of such activities among departments and agencies) relating to such matters.
“(B) The countering of terrorism within the United States, or against citizens of the United States, our allies, and our interests abroad, is hereby determined to be a matter of the highest national security priority for purposes of subparagraph (2)(A) of this subsection.”
“(3) Ensure that appropriate agencies and departments have access to and receive all-source intelligence support needed to perform independent, alternative analysis.”
(d) Subsection 1.5(m) is amended to read:
“(m)(1) Establish policies, procedures, and mechanisms that translate intelligence objectives and priorities approved by the President into specific guidance for the Intelligence Community.
“(2) In accordance with objectives and priorities approved by the President, establish collection requirements for the Intelligence Community, determine collection priorities, manage collection tasking, and resolve conflicts in the tasking of national collection assets (except when otherwise directed by the President or when the Secretary of Defense exercises collection tasking authority under plans and arrangements approved by the Secretary of Defense and the Director) of the Intelligence Community.”
“(3) Provide advisory tasking concerning collection of intelligence information to elements of the United States Government that have information collection capabilities and are not organizations within the Intelligence Community.
“(4) The responsibilities in subsections 1.5(m)(2) and (3) apply, to the maximum extent consistent with applicable law, whether information is to be collected inside or outside the United States.”
(e) Subsection 1.6(a) is amended to read:
“(a) The heads of all departments and agencies shall:
“(1) Unless the Director provides otherwise, give the Director access to all foreign intelligence, counterintelligence, and national intelligence, as defined in the Act, that is relevant to transnational terrorist threats and weapons of mass destruction proliferation threats, including such relevant intelligence derived from activities of the FBI, DHS, and any other department or agency, and all other information that is related to the national security or that otherwise is required for the performance of the Director's duties, except such information that is prohibited by law, by the President, or by the Attorney General acting under this order at the direction of the President from being provided to the Director. The Attorney General shall agree to procedures with the Director pursuant to section 3(5)(B) of the Act no later than 90 days after the issuance of this order that ensure the Director receives all such information;
“(2) support the Director in developing the NFIP;
“(3) ensure that any intelligence and operational systems and architectures of their departments and agencies are consistent with national intelligence requirements set by the Director and all applicable information sharing and security guidelines, and information privacy requirements; and
“(4) provide, to the extent permitted by law, subject to the availability of appropriations, and not inconsistent with the mission of the department or agency, such further support to the Director as the Director may request, after consultation with the head of the department or agency, for the performance of the Director's functions.”Start Printed Page 53595
Sec. 3.
Strengthened Control of Intelligence Funding. Executive Order 12333 is further amended as follows:
(a) Subsections 1.5(n), (o), and (p) are amended to read as follows:
“(n)(1) Develop, determine, and present with the advice of the heads of departments or agencies that have an organization within the Intelligence Community, the annual consolidated NFIP budget. The Director shall be responsible for developing an integrated and balanced national intelligence program that is directly responsive to the national security threats facing the United States. The Director shall submit such budget (accompanied by dissenting views, if any, of the head of a department or agency that has an organization within the Intelligence Community) to the President for approval; and
“(2) Participate in the development by the Secretary of Defense of the annual budgets for the Joint Military Intelligence Program (JMIP) and the Tactical Intelligence and Related Activities (TIARA) Program.
“(o)(1) Transfer, consistent with applicable law and with the approval of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, funds from an appropriation for the NFIP to another appropriation for the NFIP or to another NFIP component;
“(2) Review, and approve or disapprove, consistent with applicable law, any proposal to: (i) reprogram funds within an appropriation for the NFIP; (ii) transfer funds from an appropriation for the NFIP to an appropriation that is not for the NFIP within the Intelligence Community; or (iii) transfer funds from an appropriation that is not for the NFIP within the Intelligence Community to an appropriation for the NFIP; and
“(3) Monitor and consult with the Secretary of Defense on reprogrammings or transfers of funds within, into, or out of, appropriations for the JMIP and the TIARA Program.
“(p)(1) Monitor implementation and execution of the NFIP budget by the heads of departments or agencies that have an organization within the Intelligence Community, including, as necessary, by conducting program and performance audits and evaluations;
“(2) Monitor implementation of the JMIP and the TIARA Program and advise the Secretary of Defense thereon; and
“(3) After consultation with the heads of relevant departments, report periodically, and not less often than semiannually, to the President on the effectiveness of implementation of the NFIP Program by organizations within the Intelligence Community, for which purpose the heads of departments and agencies shall ensure that the Director has access to programmatic, execution, and other appropriate information.”
Sec. 4.
Strengthened Role in Selecting Heads of Intelligence Organizations. With respect to a position that heads an organization within the Intelligence Community:
(a) if the appointment to that position is made by the head of the department or agency or a subordinate thereof, no individual shall be appointed to such position without the concurrence of the Director;
(b) if the appointment to that position is made by the President alone, any recommendation to the President to appoint an individual to that position shall be accompanied by the recommendation of the Director with respect to the proposed appointment; and
(c) if the appointment to that position is made by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, any recommendation to the President for nomination of an individual for that position shall be accompanied by the recommendation of the Director with respect to the proposed nomination.
Sec. 5.
Strengthened Control of Standards and Qualifications. The Director shall issue, after coordination with the heads of departments and agencies Start Printed Page 53596with an organization in the Intelligence Community, and not later than 120 days after the date of this order, and thereafter as appropriate, standards and qualifications for persons engaged in the performance of United States intelligence activities, including but not limited to:
(a) standards for training, education, and career development of personnel within organizations in the Intelligence Community, and for ensuring compatible personnel policies and an integrated professional development and education system across the Intelligence Community, including standards that encourage and facilitate service in multiple organizations within the Intelligence Community and make such rotated service a factor to be considered for promotion to senior positions;
(b) standards for attracting and retaining personnel who meet the requirements for effective conduct of intelligence activities;
(c) standards for common personnel security policies among organizations within the Intelligence Community; and
(d) qualifications for assignment of personnel to centers established under section 1.5(g)(2) of Executive Order 12333, as amended by section 2 of this order.
Sec. 6.
Technical Corrections. Executive Order 12333 is further amended as follows:
(a) The preamble is amended by, after “amended”, inserting “(Act)”.
(b) Subsection 1.3(a)(4) is amended by, after “governments”, inserting “and organizations”.
(c) Subsection 1.4(a) is amended by, after “needed by the President”, inserting “and, in the performance of Executive functions, the Vice President,”.
(d) Subsection 1.7(c) is amended by striking “the Director of Central Intelligence and” and by striking “their respective” and inserting “its”.
(e) Subsection 1.8(c) is amended by, after “agreed upon”, inserting “by”.
(f) Subsection 1.8(i) is amended by striking “and through” and inserting in lieu thereof “through”.
(g) Subsection 1.10 is amended by:
(i) striking “The Department of the Treasury. The Secretary of the Treasury shall:” and inserting in lieu thereof “The Department of the Treasury and the Department of Homeland Security. The Secretary of the Treasury, with respect to subsections (a), (b), and (c), and the Secretary of Homeland Security with respect to subsection (d), shall:”;
(ii) in subparagraph (d), after “used against the President” inserting “or the Vice President”; and
(iii) in subparagraph (d), striking “the Secretary of the Treasury” both places it appears and inserting in lieu thereof in both places “the Secretary of Homeland Security”.
(h) Subsection 2.4(c)(1) is amended by striking “present of former” and inserting in lieu thereof “present or former”.
(i) Subsection 3.1 is amended by:
(i) striking “as provided in title 50, United States Code, section 413” and inserting in lieu thereof “implemented in accordance with applicable law, including title V of the Act”; and
(ii) striking “section 662 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 as amended (22 U.S.C. 2422), and section 501 of the National Security Act of 1947, as amended (50 U.S.C. 413),” and inserting in lieu thereof “applicable law, including title V of the Act,”.
(j) Subsection 3.4(b) is amended by striking “visably” and inserting in lieu thereof “visibly”.
(k) Subsection 3.4(f) is amended:Start Printed Page 53597
(i) after “agencies within the Intelligence Community”, by inserting “, or organizations within the Intelligence Community”;
(ii) in paragraph (8), by striking “Those” and inserting in lieu thereof “The intelligence elements of the Coast Guard and those”; and
(iii) by striking the “and” at the end of paragraph (7), striking the period at the end of paragraph (8) and inserting in lieu thereof “; and”, and adding at the end thereof “(9) National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency”.
Sec. 7.
General Provisions.
(a) This order and the amendments made by this order:
(i) shall be implemented in a manner consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations;
(ii) shall be implemented in a manner consistent with the authority of the principal officers of the executive departments as heads of their respective departments, including under section 199 of the Revised Statutes (22 U.S.C. 2651), section 201 of the Department of Energy Reorganization Act (42 U.S.C. 7131), section 102(a) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 112(a)), and sections 301 of title 5, 113(b) and 162(b) of title 10, 503 of title 28, and 301(b) of title 31, United States Code; and
(iii) shall not be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, and legislative proposals.
(b) Nothing in section 4 of this order limits or otherwise affects—
(i) the appointment of an individual to a position made before the date of this order; or
(ii) the power of the President as an appointing authority to terminate an appointment.
(c) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect any authority to provide intelligence to the President, the Vice President in the performance of Executive functions, and other officials in the executive branch.
(d) This order and amendments made by this order are intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and are not intended to, and do not, create any rights or benefits, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 53599
Executive Order 13356 of August 27, 2004
Strengthening the Sharing of Terrorism Information To
Protect Americans
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and laws of the United States of America, and in order to further strengthen the effective conduct of United States intelligence activities and protect the territory, people, and interests of the United States of America, including against terrorist attacks, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. To the maximum extent consistent with applicable law, agencies shall, in the design and use of information systems and in the dissemination of information among agencies:
(a) give the highest priority to (i) the detection, prevention, disruption, preemption, and mitigation of the effects of terrorist activities against the territory, people, and interests of the United States of America, (ii) the interchange of terrorism information among agencies, (iii) the interchange of terrorism information between agencies and appropriate authorities of States and local governments, and (iv) the protection of the ability of agencies to acquire additional such information; and
(b) protect the freedom, information privacy, and other legal rights of Americans in the conduct of activities implementing subsection (a).
Sec. 2.
Duty of Heads of Agencies Possessing or Acquiring Terrorism Information. To implement the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the head of each agency that possesses or acquires terrorism information:
(a) shall promptly give access to the terrorism information to the head of each other agency that has counterterrorism functions, and provide the terrorism information to each such agency in accordance with the standards and information sharing guidance issued pursuant to this order, unless otherwise directed by the President, and consistent with (i) the statutory responsibilities of the agencies providing and receiving the information, (ii) any guidance issued by the Attorney General to fulfill the policy set forth in subsection 1(b) of this order, and (iii) other applicable law, including section 103(c)(7) of the National Security Act of 1947, section 892 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002, Executive Order 12958 of April 17, 1995, as amended, and Executive Order 13311 of July 29, 2003;
(b) shall cooperate in and facilitate production of reports based on terrorism information with contents and formats that permit dissemination that maximizes the utility of the information in protecting the territory, people, and interests of the United States; and
(c) shall facilitate implementation of the plan developed by the Information Systems Council established by section 5 of this order.
Sec. 3.
Preparing Terrorism Information for Maximum Distribution within Intelligence Community. To assist in expeditious and effective implementation by agencies within the Intelligence Community of the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the Director of Central Intelligence shall, in consultation with the Attorney General and the other heads of agencies within the Intelligence Community, set forth not later than 90 days after the date of this order, and thereafter as appropriate, common standards for the sharing of terrorism information by agencies within the Intelligence Community with (i) other agencies within the Intelligence Community, (ii) other agencies having counterterrorism functions, and (iii) through or in Start Printed Page 53600coordination with the Department of Homeland Security, appropriate authorities of State and local governments. These common standards shall improve information sharing by such methods as:
(a) requiring, at the outset of the intelligence collection and analysis process, the creation of records and reporting, for both raw and processed information including, for example, metadata and content, in such a manner that sources and methods are protected so that the information can be distributed at lower classification levels, and by creating unclassified versions for distribution whenever possible;
(b) requiring records and reports related to terrorism information to be produced with multiple versions at an unclassified level and at varying levels of classification, for example on an electronic tearline basis, allowing varying degrees of access by other agencies and personnel commensurate with their particular security clearance levels and special access approvals;
(c) requiring terrorism information to be shared free of originator controls, including, for example, controls requiring the consent of the originating agency prior to the dissemination of the information outside any other agency to which it has been made available, to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, Executive Orders, or Presidential guidance;
(d) minimizing the applicability of information compartmentalization systems to terrorism information, to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, Executive Orders, and Presidential guidance; and
(e) ensuring the establishment of appropriate arrangements providing incentives for, and holding personnel accountable for, increased sharing of terrorism information, consistent with requirements of the Nation's security and with applicable law, Executive Orders, and Presidential guidance.
Sec. 4.
Requirements for Collection of Terrorism Information Inside the United States. (a) The Attorney General, the Secretary of Homeland Security, and the Director of Central Intelligence shall, not later than 90 days after the date of this order, jointly submit to the President, through the Assistants to the President for National Security Affairs and Homeland Security, their recommendation on the establishment of executive branch-wide collection and sharing requirements, procedures, and guidelines for terrorism information to be collected within the United States, including, but not limited to, from publicly available sources, including nongovernmental databases.
(b) The recommendation submitted under subsection (a) of this section shall also:
(i) address requirements and guidelines for the collection and sharing of other information necessary to protect the territory, people, and interests of the United States; and
(ii) propose arrangements for ensuring that officers of the United States with responsibilities for protecting the territory, people, and interests of the United States are provided with clear, understandable, consistent, effective, and lawful procedures and guidelines for the collection, handling, distribution, and retention of information.
Sec. 5.
Establishment of Information Systems Council. (a) There is established an Information Systems Council (Council), chaired by a designee of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, and composed exclusively of designees of: the Secretaries of State, the Treasury, Defense, Commerce, Energy, and Homeland Security; the Attorney General; the Director of Central Intelligence; the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation; the Director of the National Counterterrorism Center, once that position is created and filled (and until that time the Director of the Terrorism Threat Integration Center); and such other heads of departments or agencies as the Director of the Office of Management and Budget may designate.
(b) The mission of the Council is to plan for and oversee the establishment of an interoperable terrorism information sharing environment to facilitate automated sharing of terrorism information among appropriate agencies to implement the policy set forth in section 1 of this order.Start Printed Page 53601
(c) Not later than 120 days after the date of this order, the Council shall report to the President through the Assistants to the President for National Security Affairs and Homeland Security, on a plan, with proposed milestones, timetables for achieving those milestones, and identification of resources, for the establishment of the proposed interoperable terrorism information sharing environment. The plan shall, at a minimum:
(i) describe and define the parameters of the proposed interoperable terrorism information sharing environment, including functions, capabilities, and resources;
(ii) identify and, as appropriate, recommend the consolidation and elimination of current programs, systems, and processes used by agencies to share terrorism information, and recommend as appropriate the redirection of existing resources to support the interoperable terrorism information sharing environment;
(iii) identify gaps, if any, between existing technologies, programs, and systems used by agencies to share terrorism information and the parameters of the proposed interoperable terrorism information sharing environment;
(iv) recommend near-term solutions to address any such gaps until the interoperable terrorism information sharing environment can be established;
(v) recommend a plan for implementation of the interoperable terrorism information sharing environment, including roles and responsibilities, measures of success, and deadlines for the development and implementation of functions and capabilities from the initial stage to full operational capability;
(vi) recommend how the proposed interoperable terrorism information sharing environment can be extended to allow interchange of terrorism information between agencies and appropriate authorities of States and local governments; and
(vii) recommend whether and how the interoperable terrorism information sharing environment should be expanded, or designed so as to allow future expansion, for purposes of encompassing other categories of intelligence and information.
Sec. 6.
Definitions. As used in this order:
(a) the term “agency” has the meaning set forth for the term “executive agency” in section 105 of title 5, United States Code, together with the Department of Homeland Security, but includes the Postal Rate Commission and the United States Postal Service and excludes the Government Accountability Office;
(b) the terms “Intelligence Community” and “agency within the Intelligence Community” have the meanings set forth for those terms in section 3.4(f) of Executive Order 12333 of December 4, 1981, as amended;
(c) the terms “local government,” “State,” and, when used in a geographical sense, “United States,” have the meanings set forth for those terms in section 2 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 101); and
(d) the term “terrorism information” means all information, whether collected, produced, or distributed by intelligence, law enforcement, military, homeland security, or other United States Government activities, relating to (i) the existence, organization, capabilities, plans, intentions, vulnerabilities, means of finance or material support, or activities of foreign or international terrorist groups or individuals, or of domestic groups or individuals involved in transnational terrorism; (ii) threats posed by such groups or individuals to the United States, United States persons, or United States interests, or to those of other nations; (iii) communications of or by such groups or individuals; or (iv) information relating to groups or individuals reasonably believed to be assisting or associated with such groups or individuals.
Sec. 7.
General Provisions. (a) This order:Start Printed Page 53602
(i) shall be implemented in a manner consistent with applicable law, including Federal law protecting the information privacy and other legal rights of Americans, and subject to the availability of appropriations;
(ii) shall be implemented in a manner consistent with the authority of the principal officers of agencies as heads of their respective agencies, including under section 199 of the Revised Statutes (22 U.S.C. 2651), section 201 of the Department of Energy Reorganization Act (42 U.S.C. 7131), section 102(a) of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 403(a)), section 102(a) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 112(a)), and sections 301 of title 5, 113(b) and 162(b) of title 10, 1501 of title 15, 503 of title 28, and 301(b) of title 31, United States Code; and
(iii) shall not be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, and legislative proposals.
(b) This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and is not intended to, and does not, create any rights or benefits, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13357 of September 20, 2004
Termination of Emergency Declared in Executive Order 12543 With Respect to the Policies and Actions of the
Government of Libya and Revocation of Related Executive
Orders
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) (NEA), section 5 of the United Nations Participation Act, as amended (22 U.S.C. 287c) (UNPA), sections 504 and 505 of the International Security and Development Cooperation Act (22 U.S.C. 2349aa-8 and 2349aa-9), section 40106 of title 49, United States Code, and section 301 of title 3, United States Code,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, find that the situation that gave rise to the declaration of a national emergency in Executive Order 12543 of January 7, 1986, with respect to the policies and actions of the Government of Libya, and that led to the steps taken in that order and in Executive Order 12544 of January 8, 1986, and Executive Order 12801 of April 15, 1992, has been significantly altered by Libya's commitments and actions to eliminate its weapons of mass destruction programs and its Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) -class missiles, and by other developments. Accordingly, I hereby terminate the national emergency declared in Executive Order 12543, and revoke that Executive Order, Executive Order 12544, and Executive Order 12801. I also hereby revoke Executive Order 12538 of November 15, 1985, and further order:
Section 1. Pursuant to section 202(a) of the NEA (50 U.S.C. 1622(a)), termination of the national emergency declared in Executive Order 12543 with respect to the policies and actions of the Government of Libya shall not affect any action taken or proceeding pending not finally concluded or determined as of the effective date of this order, any action or proceeding based on any act committed prior to such date, or any rights or duties that matured or penalties that were incurred prior to such date.
Sec. 2. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
Sec. 3. (a) This order is effective at 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time on September 21, 2004.Start Printed Page 56666
(b) This order shall be transmitted to the Congress and published in the Federal Register.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13358 of September 28, 2004
Assignment of Functions Relating to Certain Appointments, Promotions, and Commissions in the Armed Forces
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 301 of title 3, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Assignment of Functions to the Secretary of Defense. The Secretary of Defense shall perform, except with respect to the Coast Guard during any period in which it is not operating as a service in the Navy, the functions of the President under the following provisions of title 10, United States Code:
(a) subsection 1521(a);
(b) the first sentence of subsection 12203(a);
(c) the first sentence of subsection 14111(a), except with respect to reports relating to the grades of brigadier general or above, or rear admiral (lower half) or above; and
(d) subsection 14310(a), except with respect to removals relating to a promotion list for grades of brigadier general or above, or rear admiral (lower half) or above.
Sec. 2.
Assignment of Functions to the Secretary of Homeland Security. The Secretary of Homeland Security shall perform, with respect to the Coast Guard during any period in which it is not operating as a service in the Navy, the functions assigned to the President by the following provisions of the United States Code:
(a) subsection 1521(a) of title 10;
(b) the first sentence of subsection 12203(a) of title 10;
(c) subsection 729(g) of title 14, except with respect to approval of, or removal of a name from, a report relating to the grades of rear admiral (lower half) or above; and
(d) subsection 738(a) of title 14, except with respect to removals relating to a promotion list for grades of rear admiral (lower half) or above.
Sec. 3.
Reassignment of Functions Assigned. The Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Homeland Security may reassign the functions assigned to them by this order to civilian officers, within their respective departments, who hold a position for which the President makes an appointment by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, except that the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Homeland Security may not reassign the functions assigned by sections 1(b) and 2(b), respectively. The Secretary of Defense may not reassign the function assigned by section 1(c) of this order except to such an officer within the Office of the Secretary of Defense (as defined in section 131(b) of title 10).
Sec. 4.
General Provisions. (a) This order shall take effect on October 1, 2004.
(b) Nothing in this order shall be construed to limit or otherwise affect the authority of the President as Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces of the United States, or under the Constitution and laws of the United States to nominate or to make or terminate appointments.
Start Printed Page 58798
(c) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 62391
Executive Order 13359 of October 20, 2004
Amendment to Executive Order 13173, Interagency Task Force on the Economic Development of the Central San Joaquin Valley
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to improve the operation of the Interagency Task Force on the Economic Development of the Central San Joaquin Valley, it is hereby ordered that Executive Order 13173 of October 25, 2000, is amended as follows:
Section 1. Section 1(b) is amended to read as follows:
“The Task Force shall consist exclusively of the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of Commerce, the Secretary of Defense, the Attorney General, the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of Education, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, the Secretary of Energy, the Secretary of Labor, the Secretary of Transportation, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, the Director of National Drug Control Policy, the Administrator of General Services, the Administrator of the Small Business Administration, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, or their designees, and such other senior executive branch officials as may be determined by the Task Force. The Chair of the Task Force shall be the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. Each of the Federal departments and agencies, as appropriate, shall designate one staff person, for the years 2004 through 2006, to work on issues of the Task Force and to ensure the participation of the staff person's department or agency in the operations of the Task Force.”
Sec. 2. Section 1(c)(1) is amended by inserting “regulations,” after “analyze”.
Sec. 3. Section 5 is amended to read as follows:
“Judicial Review. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and is not intended to, and does not, create any right, benefit, or trust responsibility, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its agencies, entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.”
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13360 of October 20, 2004
Providing Opportunities for Service-Disabled Veteran Businesses To Increase Their Federal Contracting and Subcontracting
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to strengthen opportunities in Federal contracting for service-disabled veteran businesses, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. America honors the extraordinary service rendered to the United States by veterans with disabilities incurred or aggravated in the line of duty during active service with the armed forces. Heads of agencies shall provide the opportunity for service-disabled veteran businesses to significantly increase the Federal contracting and subcontracting of such businesses. To achieve that objective, agencies shall more effectively implement section 15(g) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 644(g)), which provides that the President must establish a goal of not less than 3 percent for participation by service-disabled veteran businesses in Federal contracting, and section 36 of that Act (15 U.S.C. 657f), which gives agency contracting officers the authority to reserve certain procurements for service-disabled veteran businesses.
Sec. 2.
Duties of Agency Heads. To implement the policy set forth in section 1, heads of agencies shall:
(a) develop a strategy to implement the policy set forth in section 1;
(b) make the agency's strategy publicly available and report annually to the Administrator of the Small Business Administration on implementation of the agency's strategy;
(c) designate a senior-level official who shall be responsible for developing and implementing the agency's strategy;
(d) include development and implementation of the agency's strategy and achievements in furtherance of the strategy as significant elements in any performance plans of the agency's designated agency senior-level official, chief acquisition officer, and director of small and disadvantaged business utilization; and
(e) include in the agency's strategy plans for:
(i) reserving agency contracts exclusively for service-disabled veteran businesses;
(ii) encouraging and facilitating participation by service-disabled veteran businesses in competitions for award of agency contracts;
(iii) encouraging agency contractors to subcontract with service-disabled veteran businesses and actively monitoring and evaluating agency contractors' efforts to do so;
(iv) training agency personnel on applicable law and policies relating to participation of service-disabled veteran businesses in Federal contracting; and
(v) disseminating information to service-disabled veteran businesses that would assist these businesses in participating in awards of agency contracts.Start Printed Page 62550
Sec. 3.
Additional Duties of Administrator of the Small Business Administration. The Administrator of the Small Business Administration shall:
(a) designate an appropriate entity within the Small Business Administration that shall, in coordination with the Veterans Affairs' Center for Veterans Enterprise (CVE), provide to service-disabled veteran businesses information and assistance concerning participation in Federal contracting;
(b) advise and assist heads of agencies in their implementation of section 2 of this order; and
(c) make available to service-disabled veteran businesses training in Federal contracting law, procedures, and practices that would assist such businesses in participating in Federal contracting.
Sec. 4.
Additional Duties of Administrator of General Services. The Administrator of General Services shall:
(a) establish a Government-wide Acquisition Contract reserved for participation by service-disabled veteran businesses; and
(b) assist service-disabled veteran businesses to be included in Federal Supply Schedules.
Sec. 5.
Additional Duties of the Secretary of Defense. The Secretary of Defense shall direct the Defense Acquisition University (DAU) to develop training on contracting with service-disabled veteran businesses and make this training available on line through the DAU continuous learning program.
Sec. 6.
Additional Duties of the Secretary of Veterans Affairs. The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall assist agencies by making available services of the CVE and assist in verifying the accuracy of contractor registration databases with regard to service-disabled veteran businesses.
Sec. 7.
Additional Duties of the Secretary of Labor and Secretary of Veterans Affairs. The Secretary of Labor and Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall, respectively, direct the Transition Assistance Program and the Disability Transition Assistance Program to educate separating service members as to the benefits available to service-disabled veteran businesses and as to potential entrepreneurial opportunities.
Sec. 8.
Definitions. As used in this order:
(a) the term “agency” means an “executive agency” as that term is defined in section 105 of title 5, United States Code, excluding an executive agency that has fewer than 500 employees, the Government Accountability Office, or a Government corporation;
(b) the term “service-disabled” means, with respect to disability, that the disability was incurred or aggravated in the line of duty in the active service in the United States Armed Forces;
(c) the term “service-disabled veteran” means a veteran, as defined in 38 U.S.C. 101(2), with a disability that is service-connected, as defined in 38 U.S.C. 101(16);
(d) the term “service-disabled veteran business” means a small business concern owned and controlled by service-disabled veterans, as defined in section 3(q) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 632(q)); and
(e) the term “small business concern” has the meaning specified in section 3(a) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 632(a)) and the definitions and standards issued under that section.
Sec. 9.
General Provisions. (a) Heads of agencies shall carry out duties assigned by sections 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 of this order to the extent consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(b) To the extent permitted by law, an agency shall disclose personally identifying information on service-disabled veterans to other agencies who require such information in order to discharge their responsibilities under this order.Start Printed Page 62551
(c) An agency that consists of a multi-member commission shall implement this order to the extent it determines appropriate to the accomplishment of the agency's mission.
(d) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities or entities, its officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13361 of November 16, 2004
Assignment of Functions Under the United States Leadership Against HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria Act of 2003
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 301 of title 3, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Executive Order 12163 of September 29, 1979, as amended, is further amended as follows:
(a) in subsection 1-100(a), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (15), by inserting a semicolon at the end of paragraph (15), and by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
“(16) the United States Leadership Against HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-25)(the “HIV/AIDS Act”), as amended, and amendments made by the HIV/AIDS Act, which the Secretary shall perform, in the case of section 304, after consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services.”;
(b) in section 1-701, by inserting, after subsection (g), the following new subsections:
“(h) Those functions conferred by section 1(f)(1) and section 1(f)(2)(B)(ii)(VII) of the State Department Basic Authorities Act of 1956, as amended (22 U.S.C. 2651a).
“(i) Those functions conferred by section 202(d)(4)(C)(i) and (ii) of the HIV/AIDS Act, as amended.”;
(c) by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
“1-906. Implementation. In carrying out this order, officers of the United States shall ensure that all actions taken by them are consistent with the President's constitutional authority to: (a) conduct the foreign affairs of the United States; (b) withhold information the disclosure of which could impair the foreign relations, the national security, the deliberative processes of the Executive, or the performance of the Executive's constitutional duties; (c) recommend for congressional consideration such measures as the President may judge necessary and expedient; and (d) supervise the unitary executive branch.”.
Sec. 2. Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
Sec. 3. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity Start Printed Page 67634by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13362 of November 29, 2004
Designation of Additional Officers for the Department of Homeland Security Order of Succession
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America and pursuant to the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, 5 U.S.C. 3345 et seq., it is hereby ordered that:
Section 1. During any period when the Secretary of Homeland Security (Secretary), the Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security, and the officers designated to perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary by section 88 of Executive Order 13286 of February 28, 2003 (“Amendment of Executive Orders, and Other Actions, in Connection With the Transfer of Certain Functions to the Secretary of Homeland Security”), have died, resigned, or otherwise become unable to perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary, the following officers of the Department of Homeland Security, in the order listed, shall perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary, if they are eligible to act as Secretary under the provisions of the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, until such time as at least one of the officers mentioned above is able to perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary:
Director, Region V, Federal Emergency Management Agency;
Director, Region VI, Federal Emergency Management Agency;
Director, Region VII, Federal Emergency Management Agency;
Director, Region VIII, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and
Director, Region X, Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Sec. 2. Exceptions.
(a) No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 1 in an acting capacity, by virtue of so serving, shall act as Secretary pursuant to this order.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of this order, the President retains discretion, to the extent permitted by law, to depart from this order in designating an acting Secretary.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 70175
Executive Order 13363 of November 29, 2004
Establishing the Afghanistan and Iraq Campaign Medals
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including my authority as Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces of the United States and Public Law 108-234, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Afghanistan Campaign Medal. There is hereby established the Afghanistan Campaign Medal with suitable appurtenances. Except as limited in section 3 of this order, and under uniform regulations to be prescribed by the Secretaries of the military departments and approved by the Secretary of Defense, or under regulations to be prescribed by the Secretary of Homeland Security with respect to the Coast Guard when it is not operating as a service in the Navy, the Afghanistan Campaign Medal shall be awarded to members of the uniformed services of the United States who serve or have served in Afghanistan or contiguous air space, as defined by such regulations, on or after October 24, 2001, and before a terminal date to be prescribed by the Secretary of Defense.
Sec. 2. Iraq Campaign Medal. There is hereby established the Iraq Campaign Medal with suitable appurtenances. Except as limited in section 3 of this order, and under uniform regulations to be prescribed by the Secretaries of the military departments and approved by the Secretary of Defense, or under regulations to be prescribed by the Secretary of Homeland Security with respect to the Coast Guard when it is not operating as a service in the Navy, the Iraq Campaign Medal shall be awarded to members of the uniformed services of the United States who serve or have served in Iraq or contiguous waters or air space, as defined by such regulations, on or after March 19, 2003, and before a terminal date to be prescribed by the Secretary of Defense.
Sec. 3. Relationship to Other Awards. Notwithstanding section 1 of Executive Order 13289 of March 12, 2003, establishing the Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal, any member who qualified for that medal by reason of service in Afghanistan between October 24, 2001, and a terminal date to be determined by the Secretary of Defense, or in Iraq between March 19, 2003, and a terminal date to be determined by the Secretary of Defense, shall remain qualified for that medal. Upon application, a member by reason of service may be awarded either the Afghanistan Campaign Medal or the Iraq Campaign Medal in lieu of the Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal. A member may be awarded either the Afghanistan Campaign Medal or the Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal by reason of service in Afghanistan. A member may be awarded either the Iraq Campaign Medal or the Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal by reason of service in Iraq. No member shall be entitled to the award of more than one of these three medals for the same period of service.Start Printed Page 70176
Sec. 4. Posthumous Award. The Afghanistan Campaign Medal and Iraq Campaign Medal may be awarded posthumously to any person covered by and under regulations prescribed in accordance with this order.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 70177
Executive Order 13364 of November 29, 2004
Modifying the Protection Granted to the Development Fund for Iraq and Certain Property in Which Iraq Has an Interest and Protecting the Central Bank of Iraq
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, as amended (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.), section 5 of the United Nations Participation Act, as amended (22 U.S.C. 287c) (UNPA), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, hereby modify the scope of the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13303 of May 22, 2003, and expanded in Executive Order 13315 of August 28, 2003, and further modified in Executive Order 13350 of July 29, 2004, to address the unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States posed by obstacles to the orderly reconstruction of Iraq, the restoration and maintenance of peace and security in that country, and the development of political, administrative, and economic institutions in Iraq. I find that the threat of attachment or other judicial process against the Central Bank of Iraq constitutes one of these obstacles. I further determine that, consistent with United Nations Security Council Resolutions 1483 of May 22, 2003, and 1546 of June 8, 2004, the steps taken in Executive Order 13303 to deal with the national emergency declared therein need to be limited so that such steps do not apply with respect to any final judgment arising out of a contractual obligation entered into by the Government of Iraq, including any agency or instrumentality thereof, after June 30, 2004, and so that, with respect to Iraqi petroleum and petroleum products and interests therein, such steps shall apply only until title passes to the initial purchaser.
I hereby order:
Section 1. Section 1 of Executive Order 13303 is hereby amended to read as follows:
“Section 1. (a) Except as provided in section 1(b) of this order, and unless licensed or otherwise authorized pursuant to this order, any attachment, judgment, decree, lien, execution, garnishment, or other judicial process is prohibited and shall be deemed null and void with respect to the following:
(i)
the Development Fund for Iraq;
(ii)
all Iraqi petroleum and petroleum products, and interests therein, but only until title passes to the initial purchaser, and proceeds, obligations, or any financial instruments of any nature whatsoever arising from or related to the sale or marketing thereof, and interests therein, in which any foreign country or a national thereof has any interest, that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of United States persons; andStart Printed Page 70178
(iii)
any accounts, assets, investments, or any other property of any kind owned by, belonging to, or held by the Central Bank of Iraq, or held, maintained, or otherwise controlled by any financial institution of any kind in the name of, on behalf of, or otherwise for the Central Bank of Iraq.
(b)
The prohibition in section 1(a) of this order shall not apply with respect to any final judgment arising out of a contractual obligation entered into by the Government of Iraq, including any agency or instrumentality thereof, after June 30, 2004.”
Sec. 2. (a) The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA and the UNPA as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government consistent with applicable law. All agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order.
(b) Nothing contained in this order shall relieve a person from any requirement to obtain a license or other authorization in compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
Sec. 3. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right, benefit, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
Sec. 4. This order shall be transmitted to the Congress and published in the Federal Register.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13365 of December 3, 2004
2004 Amendments to the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including chapter 47 of title 10, United States Code (Uniform Code of Military Justice, 10 U.S.C. 801-946), and in order to prescribe amendments to the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, prescribed by Executive Order 12473, as amended, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. (a) Paragraph 4 of the Preamble to Part I of the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, is amended by adding a third subparagraph to read as follows:
“The Department of Defense Joint Service Committee (JSC) on Military Justice reviews the Manual for Courts-Martial and proposes amendments to the Department of Defense for con sideration by the President on an annual basis. In conducting its annual review, the JSC is guided by DoD Directive 5500.17, “The Roles and Responsibilities of the Joint Service Committee (JSC) on Military Justice.” DoD Directive 5500.17 includes provisions allowing public participation in the annual review process.”
(b) Department of Defense Directive 5500.17 shall be included as Appendix 26 to the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States.
Sec. 2. Part II of the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, is amended as follows:
(a) R.C.M. 307(c)(3) is amended to read as follows:
“Specification. A specification is a plain, concise, and definite statement of the essential facts constituting the offense charged. A specification is sufficient if it alleges every element of the charged offense expressly or by necessary implication. Except for aggravating factors under R.C.M. 1003(d) and R.C.M. 1004, facts that increase the maximum authorized punishment must be alleged in order to permit the possible increased punishment. No particular format is required.”
(b) R.C.M. 707(b)(3)(D) is amended to read as follows:
“Rehearings. If a rehearing is ordered or authorized by an appellate court, a new 120-day time period under this rule shall begin on the date that the responsible convening authority receives the record of trial and the opinion authorizing or directing a rehearing. An accused is brought to trial within the meaning of this rule at the time of arraignment under R.C.M. 904 or, if arraignment is not required (such as in the case of a sentence-only rehearing), at the time of the first session under R.C.M. 803.”
(c) R.C.M. 707(c) is amended to read as follows:
“(c) Excludable delay. All periods of time during which appellate courts have issued stays in the proceedings, or the accused is absent without authority, or the accused is hospitalized due to incompetence, or is otherwise in the custody of the Attorney General, shall be excluded when determining whether the period in subsection (a) of this rule has run. All other pretrial delays approved by a military judge or the convening authority shall be similarly excluded.”
(d) R.C.M. 707(d) is amended to read as follows:Start Printed Page 71334
“(d) Remedy. A failure to comply with this rule will result in dismissal of the affected charges, or, in a sentence-only rehearing, sentence relief as appropriate.
“(1) Dismissal. Dismissal will be with or without prejudice to the government's right to reinstitute court-martial proceedings against the accused for the same offense at a later date. The charges must be dismissed with prejudice where the accused has been deprived of his or her constitutional right to a speedy trial. In determining whether to dismiss charges with or without prejudice, the court shall consider, among others, each of the following factors: the seriousness of the offense; the facts and circumstances of the case that lead to dismissal; the impact of a re-prosecution on the administration of justice; and any prejudice to the accused resulting from the denial of a speedy trial.
“(2) Sentence relief. In determining whether or how much sentence relief is appropriate, the military judge shall consider, among others, each of the following factors: the length of the delay, the reasons for the delay, the accused's demand for speedy trial, and any prejudice to the accused from the delay. Any sentence relief granted will be applied against the sentence approved by the convening authority.”
(e) R.C.M. 806(b) is amended to read as follows:
“(b) Control of spectators and closure.
“(1) Control of spectators. In order to maintain the dignity and decorum of the proceedings or for other good cause, the military judge may reasonably limit the number of spectators in, and the means of access to, the courtroom, and exclude specific persons from the courtroom. When excluding specific persons, the military judge must make findings on the record establishing the reason for the exclusion, the basis for the military judge's belief that exclusion is necessary, and that the exclusion is as narrowly tailored as possible.
“(2) Closure. Courts-martial shall be open to the public unless (1) there is a substantial probability that an overriding interest will be prejudiced if the proceedings remain open; (2) closure is no broader than necessary to protect the overriding interest; (3) reasonable alternatives to closure were considered and found inadequate; and (4) the military judge makes case-specific findings on the record justifying closure.”
(f) R.C.M. 916(k)(2) is amended to read as follows:
“(2) Partial mental responsibility. A mental condition not amounting to a lack of mental responsibility under subsection (k)(1) of this rule is not an affirmative defense.”
(g) R.C.M. 1103(f)(2) is amended to read as follows:
“(2) Direct a rehearing as to any offense of which the accused was found guilty if the finding is supported by the summary of the evidence contained in the record, provided that the convening authority may not approve any sentence imposed at such a rehearing more severe than or in excess of that adjudged by the earlier court-martial.”
(h) The following subsection (iv) is inserted after R.C.M. 1107(e)(1)(B)(iii) to read as follows:
“(iv) Sentence reassessment. If a superior authority has approved some of the findings of guilty and has authorized a rehearing as to other offenses and the sentence, the convening authority may, unless otherwise directed, reassess the sentence based on the approved findings of guilty and dismiss the remaining charges. Reassessment is appropriate only where the convening authority determines that the accused's sentence would have been at least of a certain magnitude had the prejudicial error not been committed and the reassessed sentence is appropriate in relation to the affirmed findings of guilty.”
(i) R.C.M. 1108(b) is amended to read as follows:
“(b) Who may suspend and remit. The convening authority may, after approving the sentence, suspend the execution of all or any part of the sentence of a court-martial, except for a sentence of death. The general Start Printed Page 71335court-martial convening authority over the accused at the time of the court-martial may, when taking the action under R.C.M. 1112(f), suspend or remit any part of the sentence. The Secretary concerned and, when designated by the Secretary concerned, any Under Secretary, Assistant Secretary, Judge Advocate General, or commanding officer may suspend or remit any part or amount of the unexecuted part of any sentence other than a sentence approved by the President or a sentence of confinement for life without eligibility for parole that has been ordered executed. The Secretary concerned may, however, suspend or remit the unexecuted part of a sentence of confinement for life without eligibility for parole only after the service of a period of confinement of not less than 20 years. The commander of the accused who has the authority to convene a court-martial of the kind that adjudged the sentence may suspend or remit any part of the unexecuted part of any sentence by summary court-martial or of any sentence by special court-martial that does not include a bad-conduct discharge regardless of whether the person acting has previously approved the sentence. The “unexecuted part of any sentence” is that part that has been approved and ordered executed but that has not actually been carried out.”
(j) R.C.M. 1305(c) is amended to read as follows:
“(c) Authentication. The summary court-martial shall authenticate the record by signing the original record of trial.”
(k) R.C.M. 1306(b)(1) is amended to read as follows:
“(1) Who shall act. Except as provided herein, the convening authority shall take action in accordance with R.C.M. 1107. The convening authority shall not take action before the period prescribed in R.C.M. 1105(c)(2) has expired, unless the right to submit matters has been waived under R.C.M. 1105(d).”
Sec. 3. Part III of the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, is amended as follows:
(a) Mil. R. Evid. 103(a)(2) is amended to read as follows:
“(2) Offer of proof. In case the ruling is one excluding evidence, the substance of the evidence was made known to the military judge by offer or was apparent from the context within which questions were asked. Once the military judge makes a definitive ruling on the record admitting or excluding evidence, either at or before trial, a party need not renew an objection or offer of proof to preserve a claim of error for appeal. The standard provided in this subdivision does not apply to errors involving requirements imposed by the Constitution of the United States as applied to members of the armed forces except insofar as the error arises under these rules and this subdivision provides a standard that is more advantageous to the accused than the constitutional standard.”
(b) Mil. R. Evid. 404(a) is amended to read as follows:
“(a) Character evidence generally. Evidence of a person's character or a trait of character is not admissible for the purpose of proving action in conformity therewith on a particular occasion, except:
“(1) Character of accused. Evidence of a pertinent trait of character offered by an accused, or by the prosecution to rebut the same, or if evidence of a pertinent trait of character of the alleged victim of the crime is offered by an accused and admitted under Mil. R. Evid. 404(a)(2), evidence of the same trait of character, if relevant, of the accused offered by the prosecution;
“(2) Character of alleged victim. Evidence of a pertinent trait of character of the alleged victim of the crime offered by an accused, or by the prosecution to rebut the same, or evidence of a character trait of peacefulness of the alleged victim offered by the prosecution in a homicide or assault case to rebut evidence that the alleged victim was an aggressor;
“(3) Character of witness. Evidence of the character of a witness, as provided in Mil. R. Evid. 607, 608, and 609.”Start Printed Page 71336
(c) Mil. R. Evid. 701 is amended to read as follows:
“If the witness is not testifying as an expert, the witness' testimony in the form of opinions or inferences is limited to those opinions or inferences that are (a) rationally based on the perception of the witness, (b) helpful to a clear understanding of the witness' testimony or the determination of a fact in issue, and (c) not based in scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge within the scope of Rule 702.”
(d) Mil. R. Evid. 702 is amended to read as follows:
“If scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue, a witness qualified as an expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education may testify thereto in the form of an opinion or otherwise if (1) the testimony is based upon sufficient facts or data, (2) the testimony is the product of reliable principles and methods, and (3) the witness has applied the principles and methods reliably to the facts of the case.”
(e) Mil. R. Evid. 703 is amended to read as follows:
“The facts or data in the particular case upon which an expert bases an opinion or inference may be those perceived by or made known to the expert, at or before the hearing. If of a type reasonably relied upon by experts in the particular field in forming opinions or inferences upon the subject, the facts or data need not be admissible in evidence in order for the opinion or inference to be admitted. Facts or data that are otherwise inadmissible shall not be disclosed to the members by the proponent of the opinion or inference unless the military judge determines that their probative value in assisting the members to evaluate the expert's opinion substantially outweighs their prejudicial effect.”
(f) Mil. R. Evid. 803(6) is amended to read as follows:
“Records of regularly conducted activity. A memorandum, report, record, or data compilation, in any form, of acts, events, conditions, opinions, or diagnoses, made at or near the time by, or from information transmitted by, a person with knowledge, if kept in the course of a regularly conducted business activity, and if it was the regular practice of that business activity to make the memorandum, report, record, or data compilation, all as shown by the testimony of the custodian or other qualified witness, or by certification that complies with Mil. R. Evid. 902(11) or any other statute permitting certification in a criminal proceeding in a court of the United States, unless the source of the information or the method or circumstances of preparation indicate a lack of trustworthiness. The term “business” as used in this paragraph includes the armed forces, a business, institution, association, profession, occupation, and calling of every kind, whether or not conducted for profit. Among those memoranda, reports, records, or data compilations normally admissible pursuant to this paragraph are enlistment papers, physical examination papers, outline-figure and fingerprint cards, forensic laboratory reports, chain of custody documents, morning reports and other personnel accountability documents, service records, officer and enlisted qualification records, logs, unit personnel diaries, individual equipment records, daily strength records of prisoners, and rosters of prisoners.”
(g) The following subsection (11) is inserted after Mil. R. Evid. 902(10) to read as follows:
“(11) Certified domestic records of regularly conducted activity. The original or a duplicate of a domestic record of regularly conducted activity that would be admissible under Mil. R. Evid. 803(6) if accompanied by a written declaration of its custodian or other qualified person, in a manner complying with any Act of Congress or rule prescribed by the Supreme Court pursuant to statutory authority, certifying that the record (A) was made at or near the time of the occurrence of the matters set forth by, or from information transmitted by, a person with knowledge of those matters; (B) was kept in the course of the regularly conducted activity; and (C) was made by the regularly conducted activity as a regular practice. A party intending to offer a record into evidence under this Start Printed Page 71337paragraph must provide written notice of that intention to all adverse parties, and must make the record and declaration available for inspection sufficiently in advance of their offer into evidence to provide an adverse party with a fair opportunity to challenge them.”
(h) Mil. R. Evid. 1102 is amended to read as follows:
“(a) Amendments to the Federal Rules of Evidence shall apply to the Military Rules of Evidence 18 months after the effective date of such amendments, unless action to the contrary is taken by the President.
“(b) Rules Determined Not To Apply. The President has determined that the following Federal Rules of Evidence do not apply to the Military Rules of Evidence: Rules 301, 302, 415, and 902(12).”
Sec. 4. Part IV of the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, is amended as follows:
(a) Paragraph 45(b)(2) is amended by deleting paragraph 45(b)(2)(c) and inserting the following after paragraph 45(b)(2)(b):
“(c)(1) That at the time of the sexual intercourse the person was under the age of 12; or
“(2) That at the time of the sexual intercourse the person had attained the age of 12 but was under the age of 16.”
(b) Paragraph 45(f) is amended to read as follows:
“f. Sample specifications.
“(1) Rape.
“In that ____________ (personal jurisdiction data), did, (at/on board—location) (subject-matter jurisdiction data, if required), on or about ______ 20___, rape ____________, (a person under the age of 12) (a person who had attained the age of 12 but was under the age of 16).
“(2) Carnal Knowledge.
“In that ____________ (personal jurisdiction data), did, (at/on board—location) (subject-matter jurisdiction data, if required), on or about ________ 20___, commit the offense of carnal knowledge with ____________, (a person under the age of 12) (a person who attained the age of 12 but was under the age of 16).”
(c) Paragraph 51(b) is amended to read as follows:
“(1) That the accused engaged in unnatural carnal copulation with a certain other person or with an animal.
“(Note: Add any of the following as applicable)
“(2) That the act was done with a child under the age of 12.
“(3) That the act was done with a child who had attained the age of 12 but was under the age of 16.
“(4) That the act was done by force and without the consent of the other person.”
(d) Paragraph 51(f) is amended to read as follows:
“f. Sample specification.
“In that ____________ (personal jurisdiction data), did, (at/on board—location) (subject-matter jurisdiction data, if required), on or about ________ 20___, commit sodomy with ____________, (a child under the age of 12) (a child who had attained the age of 12 but was under the age of 16) (by force and without the consent of the said ____________).”
(e) Paragraph 57(c)(2)(b) is amended to read as follows:
“(b) Material matter. The false testimony must be with respect to a material matter, but that matter need not be the main issue in the case. Thus, perjury may be committed by giving false testimony with respect to the credibility of a material witness or in an affidavit in support of a request for a continuance, as well as by giving false testimony with respect to a fact from which a legitimate inference may be drawn as to the existence or nonexistence of a fact in issue.”Start Printed Page 71338
(f) Paragraph 100a(c)(1) is amended to read as follows:
“(1) In general. This offense is intended to prohibit and therefore deter reckless or wanton conduct that wrongfully creates a substantial risk of death or grievous bodily harm to others.”
(g) Paragraph 100a(f) is amended to read as follows:
“f. Sample specification.
“In that ____________ (personal jurisdiction data), did, (at/on board—location) (subject-matter jurisdiction data, if required), on or about ________ 20___, wrongfully and (recklessly) (wantonly) engage in conduct, to wit: (describe conduct), conduct likely to cause death or grievous bodily harm to ____________.”
Sec. 5. These amendments shall take effect 30 days from the date of this order.
(a) Nothing in these amendments shall be construed to make punishable any act done or omitted prior to the effective date of this order that was not punishable when done or omitted.
(b) Nothing in these amendments shall be construed to invalidate any nonjudicial punishment proceeding, restraint, investigation, referral of charges, trial in which arraignment occurred, or other action begun prior to the effective date of this order, and any such nonjudicial proceeding, restraint, investigation, referral of charges, trial, or other action may proceed in the same manner and with the same effect as if these amendments had not been prescribed.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13366 of December 17, 2004
Committee on Ocean Policy
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. It shall be the policy of the United States to:
(a) coordinate the activities of executive departments and agencies regarding ocean-related matters in an integrated and effective manner to advance the environmental, economic, and security interests of present and future generations of Americans; and
(b) facilitate, as appropriate, coordination and consultation regarding ocean-related matters among Federal, State, tribal, local governments, the private sector, foreign governments, and international organizations.
Sec. 2.
Definition. For purposes of this order the term “ocean-related matters” means matters involving the oceans, the Great Lakes, the coasts of the United States (including its territories and possessions), and related seabed, subsoil, and natural resources.
Sec. 3.
Establishment of Committee on Ocean Policy.
(a) There is hereby established, as a part of the Council on Environmental Quality and for administrative purposes only, the Committee on Ocean Policy (Committee).
(b) The Committee shall consist exclusively of the following:
(i) the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality, who shall be the Chairman of the Committee;
(ii) the Secretaries of State, Defense, the Interior, Agriculture, Health and Human Services, Commerce, Labor, Transportation, Energy, and Homeland Security, the Attorney General, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Director of National Intelligence, the Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy, the Director of the National Science Foundation, and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff;
(iii) the Assistants to the President for National Security Affairs, Homeland Security, Domestic Policy, and Economic Policy;
(iv) an employee of the United States designated by the Vice President; and
(v) such other officers or employees of the United States as the Chairman of the Committee may from time to time designate.
(c) The Chairman of the Committee, after coordination with the Assistants to the President for National Security Affairs and Homeland Security, shall regularly convene and preside at meetings of the Committee, determine its agenda, direct its work, and, as appropriate to deal with particular subject matters, establish and direct subcommittees of the Committee that shall consist exclusively of members of the Committee. The Committee shall coordinate its advice in a timely fashion.
(d) A member of the Committee may designate, to perform the Committee or subcommittee functions of the member, any person who is within such member's department, agency, or office and who is (i) an officer of the United States appointed by the President, (ii) a member of the Senior Executive Service or the Senior Intelligence Service, (iii) an officer or employee Start Printed Page 76592within the Executive Office of the President, or (iv) an employee of the Vice President.
(e) Consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations, the Council on Environmental Quality shall provide the funding, including through the Office of Environmental Quality as permitted by law and as appropriate, and administrative support for the Committee necessary to implement this order.
Sec. 4.
Functions of the Committee. To implement the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the Committee shall:
(a) provide advice on establishment or implementation of policies concerning ocean-related matters to:
(i) the President; and
(ii) the heads of executive departments and agencies from time to time as appropriate;
(b) obtain information and advice concerning ocean-related matters from:
(i) State, local, and tribal elected and appointed officials in a manner that seeks their individual advice and does not involve collective judgment or consensus advice or deliberation; and
(ii) representatives of private entities or other individuals in a manner that seeks their individual advice and does not involve collective judgment or consensus advice or deliberation;
(c) at the request of the head of any department or agency who is a member of the Committee, unless the Chairman of the Committee declines the request, promptly review and provide advice on a policy or policy implementation action on ocean-related matters proposed by that department or agency;
(d) provide and obtain information and advice to facilitate:
(i) development and implementation of common principles and goals for the conduct of governmental activities on ocean-related matters;
(ii) voluntary regional approaches with respect to ocean-related matters;
(iii) use of science in establishment of policy on ocean-related matters; and
(iv) collection, development, dissemination, and exchange of information on ocean-related matters; and
(e) ensure coordinated government development and implementation of the ocean component of the Global Earth Observation System of Systems.
Sec. 5.
Cooperation. To the extent permitted by law and applicable presidential guidance, executive departments and agencies shall provide the Committee such information, support, and assistance as the Committee, through the Chairman, may request.
Sec. 6.
Coordination. The Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality, the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security, and, with respect to the interagency task force established by Executive Order 13340 of May 18, 2004, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, shall ensure appropriate coordination of the activities of the Committee under this order and other policy coordination structures relating to ocean or maritime issues pursuant to Presidential guidance.
Sec. 7.
General Provisions. (a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(i) authority granted by law to a executive department or agency or the head thereof; or
(ii) functions assigned by the President to the National Security Council or Homeland Security Council (including subordinate bodies) relating to matters affecting foreign affairs, national security, homeland security, or intelligence.Start Printed Page 76593
(b) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(c) This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 77605
Executive Order 13367 of December 21, 2004
United States-Mexico Border Health Commission
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 1 of the International Organizations Immunities Act (22 U.S.C. 288) (the “Act”), and having found that the United States participates in the United States-Mexico Border Health Commission (USMBHC) pursuant to the United-States Mexico Border Health Commission Act, Public Law 103-400 (22 U.S.C. 290n et seq.), I hereby designate the USMBHC as a public international organization for purposes of the International Organizations Immunities Act. I hereby extend to members and employees of the Mexican Section of the USMBHC the same privileges, exemptions, and immunities as are accorded under similar circumstances to officers and employees, respectively, of foreign governments with regard to the laws regulating entry into and departure from the United States as provided for in section 7(a) of the Act (22 U.S.C. 288d(a)). No other privileges, exemptions, or immunities of the Act are extended under this order.
This designation is not intended to abridge in any respect privileges, exemptions, or immunities that the USMBHC otherwise may have acquired or may acquire by law.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13368 of December 30, 2004
Adjustments of Certain Rates of Pay
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the laws cited herein, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Statutory Pay Systems. The rates of basic pay or salaries of the statutory pay systems (as defined in 5 U.S.C. 5302(1)), as adjusted under 5 U.S.C. 5303(a), are set forth on the schedules attached hereto and made a part hereof: (a) The General Schedule (5 U.S.C. 5332(a)) at Schedule 1; (b) The Foreign Service Schedule (22 U.S.C. 3963) at Schedule 2; and (c) The schedules for the Veterans Health Administration of the Department of Veterans Affairs (38 U.S.C. 7306, 7404; section 301(a) of Public Law 102-40) at Schedule 3.
Sec. 2.
Senior Executive Service. The ranges of rates of basic pay for senior executives in the Senior Executive Service, as established pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 5382, are set forth on Schedule 4 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 3.
Certain Executive, Legislative and Judicial Salaries. The rates of basic pay or salaries for the following offices and positions are set forth on the schedules attached hereto and made a part hereof:
(a) The Executive Schedule (5 U.S.C. 5312-5318) at Schedule 5;
(b) The Vice President (3 U.S.C. 104) and the Congress (2 U.S.C. 31) at Schedule 6; and
(c) Justices and judges (28 U.S.C. 5, 44(d), 135, 252, and 461(a), section 140 of Public Law 97-92, and section 306 of Division B of Public Law 108-447) at Schedule 7.
Sec. 4.
Uniformed Services. Pursuant to section 601(a)-(b) of Public Law 108-375, the rates of monthly basic pay (37 U.S.C. 203(a)) for members of the uniformed services, as adjusted under 37 U.S.C. 1009, and the rate of monthly cadet or midshipman pay (37 U.S.C. 203(c)) are set forth on Schedule 8 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 5.
Locality-Based Comparability Payments. (a) Pursuant to section 5304 of title 5, United States Code, and section 640 of Division H of Public Law 108-447, locality-based comparability payments shall be paid in accordance with Schedule 9 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
(b) The Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall take such actions as may be necessary to implement these payments and to publish appropriate notice of such payments in the Federal Register.
Sec. 6.
Administrative Law Judges. The rates of basic pay for administrative law judges, as adjusted under 5 U.S.C. 5372(b)(4), are set forth on Schedule 10 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 7.
Effective Dates. Schedule 8 is effective on January 1, 2005. The other schedules contained herein are effective on the first day of the first applicable pay period beginning on or after January 1, 2005.Start Printed Page 1148
Sec. 8.
Prior Order Superseded. Executive Order 13332 of March 3, 2004, is superseded.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
December 30, 2004.
Start Printed Page 1149
Start Printed Page 1150
Start Printed Page 1151
Start Printed Page 1152
Start Printed Page 1153
Start Printed Page 1154
Start Printed Page 1155
Start Printed Page 1156
Start Printed Page 2323
Executive Order 13369 of January 7, 2005
President's Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to assist in reforming the Federal Internal Revenue Code to benefit all Americans, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment. There is established the President's Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform (Advisory Panel).
Sec. 2.
Membership. (a) The Advisory Panel shall be composed of up to nine members appointed by the President.
(b) The President shall designate one member of the Advisory Panel to serve as Chair and one member to serve as Vice Chair.
Sec. 3.
Purpose. The purpose of the Advisory Panel shall be to submit to the Secretary of the Treasury in accordance with this order a report with revenue neutral policy options for reforming the Federal Internal Revenue Code. These options should:
(a)
simplify Federal tax laws to reduce the costs and administrative burdens of compliance with such laws;
(b)
share the burdens and benefits of the Federal tax structure in an appropriately progressive manner while recognizing the importance of homeownership and charity in American society; and
(c)
promote long-run economic growth and job creation, and better encourage work effort, saving, and investment, so as to strengthen the competitiveness of the United States in the global marketplace.
At least one option submitted by the Advisory Panel should use the Federal income tax as the base for its recommended reforms.
Sec. 4.
Administration. (a) The Department of the Treasury shall provide, to the extent permitted by law, administrative support and funding for the Advisory Panel. The Advisory Panel is established within the Department of the Treasury for administrative purposes only.
(b) The Chair of the Advisory Panel shall convene and preside at the meetings of the Advisory Panel, determine its agenda after consultation with the Vice Chair, and direct its work. The Advisory Panel shall have a staff headed by an Executive Director who shall be selected by the President and report to the Chair.
(c) Members of the Advisory Panel shall serve without compensation for their work on the Advisory Panel. Members of the Advisory Panel who are not officers or employees in the executive branch, while engaged in the work of the Advisory Panel, may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in Government service (5 U.S.C. 5701 through 5707), consistent with the availability of funds.
(d) Consistent with applicable law, heads of executive departments and agencies shall provide to the Advisory Panel such assistance, including assignment or detail of personnel, and information as may be necessary for the Advisory Panel to perform its functions.
(e) The Advisory Panel may conduct meetings in appropriate locations throughout the United States to obtain information and advice from Americans of diverse backgrounds and experience and from a diverse range of Start Printed Page 2324American entities, including large and small for-profit and non-profit organizations, State, local, and tribal governments, and from other individuals and entities as appropriate. Public hearings shall be held at the call of the Chair.
(f) Insofar as the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.) (the “Act”), may apply to the Advisory Panel, any functions of the President under that Act, except for those in section 6 of that Act, shall be performed by the Secretary of the Treasury in accordance with the guidelines that have been issued by the Administrator of General Services.
Sec. 5.
Report. The Advisory Panel shall submit to the Secretary of the Treasury a report containing policy options in accordance with section 3 of this order as soon as practicable, but not later than July 31, 2005.
Sec. 6.
Provisions. (a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(b) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
Sec. 7.
Termination. The Advisory Panel shall terminate 30 days after submitting its report pursuant to section 5 of this order.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13370 of January 13, 2005
Providing an Order of Succession in the Office of
Management and Budget
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America and pursuant to the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, 5 U.S.C. 3345 et seq., it is hereby ordered that:
Section 1. During any period when the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (Director) and the Deputy Director of the Office of Management and Budget (Deputy Director) have died, resigned, or otherwise become unable to perform the functions and duties of the office of Director, the following officers of the Office of Management and Budget, in the order listed, shall perform the functions and duties of the office of Director, if they are eligible to act as Director under the provisions of the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, until such time as at least one of the officers mentioned above is able to perform the functions and duties of the office of Director:
Deputy Director for Management;
Executive Associate Director;
Associate Director (National Security Programs);
Associate Director (General Government Programs);
Associate Director (Human Resource Programs);
Associate Director (Natural Resource Programs);
General Counsel;
Administrator for Federal Procurement Policy;
Administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs;
Controller, Office of Federal Financial Management; and
Administrator of the Office of Electronic Government.
Sec. 2.
Exceptions. (a) No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 1 in an acting capacity, by virtue of so serving, shall act as Director pursuant to this order.Start Printed Page 3138
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of this order, the President retains discretion, to the extent permitted by law, to depart from this order in designating an acting Director.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13371 of January 27, 2005
Amendments to Executive Order 13285, Relating to the President's Council on Service and Civic Participation
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to modify the mission and functions of the President's Council on Service and Civic Participation (Council) and to extend the Council, it is hereby ordered that Executive Order 13285 of January 29, 2003, is amended as follows:
Section 1. (a) Sections 2(a) and 2(b) of Executive Order 13285 are revised to read as follows: “(a) The mission and functions of the Council shall be to:
(i) promote volunteer service and civic participation in American society;
(ii) encourage the recognition of outstanding volunteer service through the presentation of the President's Volunteer Service Award by Council members and Certifying Organizations, thereby encouraging more such activity;
(iii) promote the efforts and needs of local non-profits and volunteer organizations, including volunteer centers;
(iv) promote greater public access to information about existing volunteer opportunities, including via the Internet;
(v) assist with the promotion of Federally administered volunteer programs and the link that they have to increasing and strengthening community volunteer service; and
(vi) promote increased and sustained private sector sponsorship of and engagement in volunteer service.
(b) In carrying out its mission, the Council shall:
(i) encourage broad participation in the President's Volunteer Service Award program by qualified individuals and groups, especially students in primary schools, secondary schools, and institutions of higher learning;
(ii) exchange information and ideas with interested individuals and organizations on ways to expand and improve volunteer service and civic participation;
(iii) advise the Chief Executive Officer of the CNCS on broad dissemination, especially among schools and youth organizations, of information regarding recommended practices for the promotion of volunteer service and civic participation, and other relevant educational and promotional materials;
(iv) monitor and advise the Chief Executive Officer of the CNCS on the need for the enhancement of materials disseminated pursuant to subsection 2(b)(iii) of this order; and
(v) make recommendations from time to time to the President, through the Director of the USA Freedom Corps, on ways to encourage greater levels of volunteer service and civic participation by individuals, schools, and organizations.”Start Printed Page 5042
Sec. 2. Section 4(b) of Executive Order 13285 is revised to read as follows: “(b) Unless further extended by the President, this order shall expire on January 29, 2007.”
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 8499
Executive Order 13372 of February 16, 2005
Clarification of Certain Executive Orders Blocking Property and Prohibiting Certain Transactions
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, as amended (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) (NEA), section 5 of the United Nations Participation Act of 1945, as amended (22 U.S.C. 287c) (UNPA), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, in order to clarify the steps taken in Executive Order 12947 of January 23, 1995, as amended by Executive Order 13099 of August 20, 1998; and Executive Order 13224 of September 23, 2001, as amended by Executive Order 13268 of July 2, 2002, and Executive Order 13284 of January 23, 2003, in particular with respect to the implementation of section 203(b)(2) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)), hereby order:
Section 1. Section 4 of Executive Order 13224 is hereby amended to read as follows:
“Sec. 4. I hereby determine that the making of donations of the type of articles specified in section 203(b)(2) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)), by, to, or for the benefit of, any persons determined to be subject to this order would seriously impair my ability to deal with the national emergency declared in this order, and would endanger Armed Forces of the United States that are in a situation where imminent involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated by the circumstances, and I hereby prohibit such donations as provided by section 1 of this order. Furthermore, I hereby determine that the Trade Sanctions Reform and Export Enhancement Act of 2000 (Title IX, Public Law 106-387) shall not affect the imposition or the continuation of the imposition of any unilateral agricultural sanction or unilateral medical sanction on any person determined to be subject to this order because imminent involvement of the Armed Forces of the United States in hostilities is clearly indicated by the circumstances.”
Sec. 2. Section 3 of Executive Order 12947 is hereby amended to read as follows:
“Sec. 3. I hereby determine that the making of donations of the type of articles specified in section 203(b)(2) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)), by, to, or for the benefit of, any person whose property or interests in property are blocked pursuant to section 1 of this order would seriously impair my ability to deal with the national emergency declared in this order, and I hereby prohibit such donations as provided by section 1.”
Sec. 3. (a) The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA and the UNPA as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government consistent with applicable law. All agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order.Start Printed Page 8500
(b) Nothing contained in this order shall relieve a person from any requirement to obtain a license or other authorization in compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
(c) Amendments to Executive Orders made by this order shall take effect as of the date of this order.
Sec. 4. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right, benefit, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
Sec. 5. This order shall be transmitted to the Congress and published in the Federal Register.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13373 of March 10, 2005
Amendments to Executive Order 11926
Relating to the Vice Presidential Service Badge
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Amendments to Executive Order 11926. Executive Order 11926 of July 19, 1976, as amended by Executive Order 13286 of February 28, 2003, is further amended as follows:
(a) in section 1, by striking “and Coast Guard” and inserting in lieu thereof “Coast Guard, commissioned corps of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and commissioned corps of the Public Health Service”;
(b) in section 1, by inserting “, or who have been assigned to perform duties predominantly for the Vice President for a period of at least one year subsequent to January 20, 2001, in the implementation of Public Law 93-346, as amended, or in military units and support facilities to which section 1 of Executive Order 12793 of March 20, 1992, as amended, refers” immediately preceding the period;
(c) in section 2, by striking “Military Assistant to the Vice President” and inserting in lieu thereof “Vice President's designee (with the concurrence of the Director of the White House Military Office in the case of personnel in military units or support facilities to which section 1 of Executive Order 12793, as amended, refers)”;
(d) in section 2, by inserting “and, in the case of members of the commissioned corps of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration or the commissioned corps of the Public Health Service so assigned, by the Secretary of Commerce or the Secretary of Health and Human Services, respectively” immediately preceding the period;
(e) in section 5, by adding at the end of the section “No award shall be made to an individual under this Order based on a period of service with respect to which, in whole or in part, the individual was awarded the Presidential Service Badge.”;
(f) in section 6, by striking “and Coast Guard,” and inserting in lieu thereof “Coast Guard, commissioned corps of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and commissioned corps of the Public Health Service,”;
(g) in section 6, by inserting “, or who has been assigned to perform duties predominantly for the Vice President, in the implementation of Public Law 93-346, as amended, or in military units and support facilities to which section 1 of Executive Order 12793, as amended, refers,” after “Office of the Vice President”;
(h) in section 6, by inserting “, unless otherwise directed by the Director of the White House Military Office in the case of personnel in military units or support facilities to which section 1 of Executive Order 12793, as amended, refers,” after “is authorized”;
(i) in section 6, by inserting “or her” after “his”; and
(j) in section 6, by striking “first day of duty in the Office of the Vice President” and inserting in lieu thereof “first day of such duty”.Start Printed Page 12580
Sec. 2. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13374 of March 14, 2005
Amendments to Executive Order 12293—The Foreign Service of the United States
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 402 of the Foreign Service Act of 1980, as amended (22 U.S.C. 3962), and in order to adjust the basic salary rates for each class of the Senior Foreign Service, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Section 4 of Executive Order 12293 of February 23, 1981, as amended, is amended to read as follows:
“Sec. 4. Pursuant to section 402 of the Foreign Service Act (22 U.S.C. 3962), and subject to any restrictions therein, there are established the following salary classes with titles for the Senior Foreign Service, at the following ranges of basic rates of pay:
(a)
Career Minister
Range from 100 percent of the minimum rate of basic pay for senior-level positions under 5 U.S.C. 5376 to 100 percent of the rate payable for level II of the Executive Schedule.
(b)
Minister-Counselor
Range from 100 percent of the minimum rate of basic pay for senior-level positions under 5 U.S.C. 5376 to 107 percent of the rate payable for level III of the Executive Schedule.
(c)
Counselor
Range from 100 percent of the minimum rate of basic pay for senior-level positions under 5 U.S.C. 5376 to 102 percent of the rate payable for level III of the Executive Schedule.”
Sec. 2. Section 2 of Executive Order 12293, as amended, is amended by striking “the Director of the International Communication Agency, the Director of the United States International Development Cooperation Agency” and inserting in lieu thereof “the Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development”.
Sec. 3. Executive Order 13325 of January 23, 2004, is revoked.
Sec. 4. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable by any party at law or in Start Printed Page 12962equity against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 17299
Executive Order 13375 of April 1, 2005
Amendment to Executive Order 13295 Relating to Certain
Influenza Viruses and Quarantinable Communicable Diseases
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 361(b) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 264(b)), it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Based upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Health and Human Services, in consultation with the Surgeon General, and for the purpose set forth in section 1 of Executive Order 13295 of April 4, 2003, section 1 of such order is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
“(c) Influenza caused by novel or reemergent influenza viruses that are causing, or have the potential to cause, a pandemic.”.
Sec. 2. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13376 of April 13, 2005
Amendments to Executive Order 12863, Relating to the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 (Public Law 108-458), and to update and clarify Executive Order 12863, which created the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, Executive Order 12863 of September 13, 1993, as amended by Executive Orders 13070 of December 15, 1997, and 13301 of May 14, 2003, is further amended as follows:
(a)
effective upon appointment of the Director of National Intelligence, by striking “Director of Central Intelligence” each place it appears and inserting in lieu thereof “Director of National Intelligence”; and
(b)
by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
“Sec. 3.4. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch of the Federal Government, and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, against the United States, its departments, agencies, or other entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.”.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 20263
Executive Order 13377 of April 13, 2005
Designating the African Union as a Public International Organization Entitled To Enjoy Certain Privileges, Exemptions, and Immunities
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including sections 1 and 12 of the International Organizations Immunities Act (22 U.S.C. 288 and 288f-2), as amended by section 569(h) of the Foreign Operations, Export Financing, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2005 (Division D of Public Law 108-447), it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Designation. The African Union is hereby designated as a public international organization entitled to enjoy the privileges, exemptions, and immunities provided by the International Organizations Immunities Act.
Sec. 2.
Non-Abridgement. The designation in section 1 of this order is not intended to abridge in any respect privileges, exemptions, or immunities that the African Union otherwise may have acquired or may acquire by law.
Sec. 3.
Revocation. Executive Order 11767 of February 19, 1974, is revoked.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 28413
Executive Order 13378 of May 12, 2005
Amendments to Executive Order 12788 Relating to the Defense Economic Adjustment Program
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including 10 U.S.C. 2391 and the Defense Economic Adjustment, Diversification, Conversion, and Stabilization Act of 1990, enacted as Division D, section 4001 et seq., of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1991, Public Law 101-510, and in order to update the Defense Economic Adjustment Program, it is hereby ordered that Executive Order 12788 of January 15, 1992, as amended, is further amended as follows:
Section 1. The text of section 2 of Executive Order 12788 is revised to read as follows: “The Defense Economic Adjustment Program shall (1) assist substantially and seriously affected communities, businesses, and workers from the effects of major Defense base closures, realignments, and Defense contract-related adjustments, and (2) assist State and local governments in preventing the encroachment of civilian communities from impairing the operational utility of military installations.”
Sec. 2. (a) The text of section 3(c) is amended by deleting “and communities” and inserting in lieu thereof “communities, and businesses”;
(b) The text of section 3(l) is amended by deleting “and” after the semicolon;
(c) The text of section 3(m) is amended by adding “and” after “diminish;” and
(d) A new section 3(n) is added to read: “(n) Encourage resolution of regulatory issues that impede encroachment prevention and local economic adjustment efforts.”
Sec. 3. (a) Section 4(a) is amended by: (i) deleting “(19) Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency;” (ii) deleting “(21) Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency;” and (iii) renumbering the remaining subsections listing the officials on the Economic Adjustment Committee (the “Committee”) accordingly;
(b) The text of section 4(b) is revised to read as follows: “The Secretary of Defense, or the Secretary's designee, shall chair the Committee.”; and
(c) The text of section 4(c) is revised to read as follows: “The Secretaries of Labor and Commerce shall serve as Vice Chairmen of the Committee. The Vice Chairmen shall co-chair the Committee in the absence of both the Chairman and the Chairman's designee and may also preside over meetings of designated representatives of the concerned executive agencies.”
Sec. 4. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable by any party at law or in Start Printed Page 28414equity against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees, agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 35505
Executive Order 13379 of June 16, 2005
Amendment to Executive Order 13369, Relating to the President's Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to extend the reporting deadline of the President's Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Section 5 of Executive Order 13369 of January 7, 2005, is amended by deleting “July 31, 2005” and inserting in lieu thereof “September 30, 2005”.
Sec. 2. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13380 of June 17, 2005
Implementing Amendments to Agreement on Border
Environment Cooperation Commission and North American Development Bank
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 533 of the North American Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act (19 U.S.C. 3473), it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Executive Order 12916 of May 13, 1994, is amended as follows:
(a) in section 1, by inserting “, as amended by the Protocol of Amendment done at Washington and Mexico City, November 25 and 26, 2002” after “North American Development Bank”;
(b) by striking section 2 and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
“Sec. 2. (a) The Secretary of State, the Secretary of the Treasury, and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall be members of the Board of Directors of the Border Environment Cooperation Commission and the North American Development Bank (“Board”) as provided in clauses (1), (3), and (5) of article II in chapter III of the Agreement.
(b) Appointments to the Board under clauses (7) and (9) of article II in chapter III of the Agreement shall be made by the President. Individuals so appointed shall serve at the pleasure of the President.
(c) The Secretary of the Treasury is selected to be the Chairperson of the Board during any period in which the United States is to select the Chairperson under article III in chapter III of the Agreement.
(d) Except with respect to functions assigned by section 4, 5, 6, or 7 of this order, the Secretary of the Treasury shall coordinate with the Secretary of State, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, such other agencies and officers as may be appropriate, and the individuals appointed under subsection 2(b) as may be appropriate, the development of the policies and positions of the United States with respect to matters coming before the Board.”;
(c) in section 3, by striking subsections (a), (b), and (c), striking “(d)”, and striking “representatives” and inserting in lieu thereof “members of the Board listed in subsections 2(a) and (b)”;
(d) in section 6, by striking “Advisory Committee” and inserting in lieu thereof “Community Adjustment and Investment Program Advisory Committee (“Advisory Committee”) established pursuant to section 543(b) of the NAFTA Implementation Act”; and
(e) in section 7(c), by striking “Members” and inserting in lieu thereof “members”.
Sec. 2. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity Start Printed Page 35510by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13381 of June 27, 2005
Strengthening Processes Relating to Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified National Security Information
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to assist in determining eligibility for access to classified national security information, while taking appropriate account of title III of Public Law 108-458, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. To the extent consistent with safeguarding the security of the United States and protecting classified national security information from unauthorized disclosure, agency functions relating to determining eligibility for access to classified national security information shall be appropriately uniform, centralized, efficient, effective, timely, and reciprocal.
Sec. 2.
Functions of the Office of Management and Budget. The Director of the Office of Management and Budget (Director):
(a) may, to ensure the effective implementation of the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, assign, in whole or in part, to the head of any agency (solely or jointly) any process relating to determinations of eligibility for access to classified national security information, with the agency's exercise of such assigned process to be subject to the Director's supervision and to such terms and conditions (including approval by the Office of Management and Budget) as the Director determines appropriate;
(b) shall carry out any process that the Director does not assign to another agency (or agencies) under subsection (a);
(c) may, after consultation with the Secretary of State, Secretary of Defense, the Attorney General, the Secretary of Energy, the Secretary of Homeland Security, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI), and the Director of the Office of Personnel Management, issue guidelines and instructions to the heads of agencies to ensure appropriate uniformity, centralization, efficiency, effectiveness, and timeliness in processes relating to determinations by agencies of eligibility for access to classified national security information;
(d) may, with regard to determining eligibility for access to Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI) and “special access programs pertaining to intelligence activities; including special activities, but not including military operational, strategic, and tactical programs” (Intelligence SAPs) under section 4.3(a) of Executive Order 12958 of April 17, 1995, as amended, issue guidelines and instructions with the concurrence of the DNI to the heads of agencies to ensure appropriate uniformity, centralization, efficiency, effectiveness, and timeliness in making such determinations relating to those programs;
(e) may, with regard to determining eligibility for access to special access programs (SAP) as defined in Executive Order 12958 other than Intelligence SAPs, issue guidelines and instructions with the concurrence of the agency head with responsibility for the SAP to ensure appropriate uniformity, centralization, efficiency, effectiveness, and timeliness in making such determinations relating to those programs;
(f) may report periodically to the President on implementation by agencies of the policy set forth in section 1; andStart Printed Page 37954
(g) shall submit reports to the Congress relating to the subject matter of this order to the extent required by law.
Sec. 3.
Functions of the Heads of Agencies. (a) Heads of agencies shall:
(i) carry out any process assigned to the agency head by the Director under subsection 2(a) of this order, and shall assist the Director in carrying out any process under subsection 2(b);
(ii) implement guidelines and instructions issued by the Director under subsections 2(c), 2(d), and 2(e) of this order;
(iii) to the extent permitted by law, make available to the Director such information as the Director may request to implement this order;
(iv) ensure that all actions taken under this order take appropriate account of the counterintelligence interests of the United States; and
(v) ensure that all actions taken under this order are consistent with the DNI's responsibility to protect intelligence sources and methods.
(b) The Director and other heads of agencies shall ensure that all actions taken under this order are consistent with the President's constitutional authority to (i) conduct the foreign affairs of the United States, (ii) withhold information the disclosure of which could impair the foreign relations, the national security, the deliberative processes of the Executive, or the performance of the Executive's constitutional duties, (iii) recommend for congressional consideration such measures as the President may judge necessary or expedient, and (iv) supervise the unitary executive branch.
Sec. 4.
Definitions. As used in this order:
(a) the term “agencies” means: (i) any “executive department” as defined in section 101 of title 5, United States Code, as well as the Department of Homeland Security; (ii) any “military department” as defined in section 102 of title 5, United States Code; (iii) any “government corporation” as defined in section 103 of title 5, United States Code; and (iv) any “independent establishment” as defined in section 104 of title 5, United States Code, but excluding the Government Accountability Office and including the United States Postal Service and the Postal Rate Commission.
(b) the term “classified national security information” means information that is classified pursuant to Executive Order 12958;
(c) the term “counterintelligence” has the meaning specified for that term in section 3 of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 401a); and
(d) the term “process” means: (i) oversight of determinations of eligibility for access to classified national security information, including for SCI and SAPs made by any agency, as well as the acquisition of information through investigation or other means upon which such determinations are made; (ii) developing and implementing uniform and consistent policies and procedures to ensure the effective, efficient, and timely completion of access eligibility determinations, to include for SAPs; (iii) designating an authorized agency for making access eligibility determinations and an authorized agency for collecting information through investigation upon which such determinations are made; (iv) ensuring reciprocal recognition of determinations of eligibility for access to classified information among the agencies of the United States Government, including resolution of disputes involving the reciprocity of security clearances and access to SCI and SAPs; (v) ensuring the availability of resources to achieve clearance and investigative program goals regarding the making of access determinations as well as the collection of information through investigation and other means upon which such determinations are made; and (vi) developing tools and techniques for enhancing the making of access eligibility determinations as well as the collection of information through investigation and other means upon which such determinations are made.
Sec. 5.
General Provisions. (a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to supersede, impede, or otherwise affect:
(1)
Executive Order 10865 of February 20, 1960, as amended;Start Printed Page 37955
(2)
Executive Order 12333 of December 4, 1981, as amended;
(3)
Executive Order 12958, as amended;
(4)
Executive Order 12968 of August 2, 1995;
(5)
Executive Order 12829 of January 6, 1993, as amended;
(6)
subsections 102A(i) and (j) of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 403-1(i) and (j)); and
(7)
sections 141 through 146 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2161 through 2166).
(b) Executive Order 12171 of November 19, 1979, as amended, is further amended by inserting after section after 1-215 the following new section: “1-216. The Center for Federal Investigative Services, Office of Personnel Management.”
(c) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect any authority of the Director, including with respect to budget, legislative, or administrative proposals. The Director may use any authority of the Office of Management and Budget in carrying out this order.
(d) Existing delegations of authority to any agency relating to granting access to classified information and conducting investigations shall remain in effect, subject to the authority of the Office of Management and Budget under section 2 of this order to revise or revoke such delegation.
(e) This order is intended solely to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
Sec. 6.
Submission of Report and Expiration of Order.
(a) The Director shall submit a report to the President, on or before April 1, 2006, on the implementation of this order and the policy set forth in section 1 of this order.
(b) Unless extended by the President, this order shall expire on July 1, 2006.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13382 of June 28, 2005
Blocking Property of Weapons of Mass Destruction Proliferators and Their Supporters
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code,
I, George W. Bush, President of the United States of America, in order to take additional steps with respect to the national emergency described and declared in Executive Order 12938 of November 14, 1994, regarding the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the means of delivering them, and the measures imposed by that order, as expanded by Executive Order 13094 of July 28, 1998, hereby order:
Section 1. (a) Except to the extent provided in section 203(b)(1), (3), and (4) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(1), (3), and (4)), or in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date of this order, all property and interests in property of the following persons, that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of United States persons, are blocked and may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in:
(i) the persons listed in the Annex to this order;
(ii) any foreign person determined by the Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, the Attorney General, and other relevant agencies, to have engaged, or attempted to engage, in activities or transactions that have materially contributed to, or pose a risk of materially contributing to, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction or their means of delivery (including missiles capable of delivering such weapons), including any efforts to manufacture, acquire, possess, develop, transport, transfer or use such items, by any person or foreign country of proliferation concern;
(iii) any person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, the Attorney General, and other relevant agencies, to have provided, or attempted to provide, financial, material, technological or other support for, or goods or services in support of, any activity or transaction described in paragraph (a)(ii) of this section, or any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order; and
(iv) any person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, the Attorney General, and other relevant agencies, to be owned or controlled by, or acting or purporting to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order.
(b) Any transaction or dealing by a United States person or within the United States in property or interests in property blocked pursuant to this order is prohibited, including, but not limited to, (i) the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of, any person whose property and interests in property are blocked Start Printed Page 38568pursuant to this order, and (ii) the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.
(c) Any transaction by a United States person or within the United States that evades or avoids, has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
(d) Any conspiracy formed to violate the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
Sec. 2. For purposes of this order:
(a) the term “person” means an individual or entity;
(b) the term “entity” means a partnership, association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization; and
(c) the term “United States person” means any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States.
Sec. 3. I hereby determine that the making of donations of the type of articles specified in section 203(b)(2) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)) by, to, or for the benefit of, any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order would seriously impair my ability to deal with the national emergency declared in Executive Order 12938, and I hereby prohibit such donations as provided by section 1 of this order.
Sec. 4. Section 4(a) of Executive Order 12938, as amended, is further amended to read as follows:
“Sec. 4.
Measures Against Foreign Persons.
(a) Determination by Secretary of State; Imposition of Measures. Except to the extent provided in section 203(b) of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)), where applicable, if the Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, determines that a foreign person, on or after November 16, 1990, the effective date of Executive Order 12735, the predecessor order to Executive Order 12938, has engaged, or attempted to engage, in activities or transactions that have materially contributed to, or pose a risk of materially contributing to, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction or their means of delivery (including missiles capable of delivering such weapons), including any efforts to manufacture, acquire, possess, develop, transport, transfer, or use such items, by any person or foreign country of proliferation concern, the measures set forth in subsections (b), (c), and (d) of this section shall be imposed on that foreign person to the extent determined by the Secretary of State, in consultation with the implementing agency and other relevant agencies. Nothing in this section is intended to preclude the imposition on that foreign person of other measures or sanctions available under this order or under other authorities.”
Sec. 5. For those persons whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to section 1 of this order who might have a constitutional presence in the United States, I find that because of the ability to transfer funds or other assets instantaneously, prior notice to such persons of measures to be taken pursuant to this order would render these measures ineffectual. I therefore determine that for these measures to be effective in addressing the national emergency declared in Executive Order 12938, as amended, there need be no prior notice of a listing or determination made pursuant to section 1 of this order.
Sec. 6. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government, consistent with applicable law. All agencies of the United States Government are Start Printed Page 38569hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order and, where appropriate, to advise the Secretary of the Treasury in a timely manner of the measures taken.
Sec. 7. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to determine, subsequent to the issuance of this order, that circumstances no longer warrant the inclusion of a person in the Annex to this order and that the property and interests in property of that person are therefore no longer blocked pursuant to section 1 of this order.
Sec. 8. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
Sec. 9. (a) This order is effective at 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time on June 29, 2005.
(b) This order shall be transmitted to the Congress and published in the Federal Register.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
June 28, 2005.
ANNEX
Korea Mining Development Trading Corporation
Tanchon Commercial Bank
Korea Ryonbong General Corporation
Aerospace Industries Organization
Shahid Hemmat Industrial Group
Shahid Bakeri Industrial Group
Atomic Energy Organization of Iran
Scientific Studies and Research Center
Start Printed Page 41933
Executive Order 13383 of July 15, 2005
Amending Executive Orders 12139 and 12949 in Light of
Establishment of the Office of Director of National Intelligence
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section. 1. Section 1-103 of Executive Order 12139 of May 23, 1979, is amended by:
(a) striking “(c) Director of Central Intelligence” and inserting in lieu thereof “(c) Director of National Intelligence”;
(b) striking “(g) Deputy Director of Central Intelligence” and inserting in lieu thereof “(g) Director of the Central Intelligence Agency”; and
(c) adding at the end thereof “(h) Principal Deputy Director of National Intelligence.”.
Sec. 2. Section 3 of Executive Order 12949 of February 9, 1995, is amended by:
(a) striking “(c) Director of Central Intelligence” and inserting in lieu thereof “Director of National Intelligence”;
(b) striking “and” at the end of subsection (f);
(c) striking “(g) Deputy Director of Central Intelligence.” and inserting in lieu thereof “(g) Director of the Central Intelligence Agency; and”; and
(d) adding at the end thereof “(h) Principal Deputy Director of National Intelligence.”.
Sec. 3. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable by any party at law or in equity against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13384 of July 27, 2005
Assignment of Functions Relating to Original Appointments as Commissioned Officers and Chief Warrant Officer Appointments in the Armed Forces
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 301 of title 3, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Assignment of Functions to the Secretary of Defense. The Secretary of Defense shall perform the functions of the President under the following provisions of title 10, United States Code:
(a) subsection 531(a)(1); and
(b) the second sentence of subsection 571(b).
Sec. 2.
Reassignment of Functions Assigned. The Secretary of Defense may not reassign the functions assigned to him by this order.
Sec. 3.
General Provisions. (a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to limit or otherwise affect the authority of the President as Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces of the United States, or under the Constitution and laws of the United States to nominate or to make or terminate appointments.
(b) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13385 of September 29, 2005
Continuance of Certain Federal Advisory Committees and Amendments to and Revocation of Other Executive Orders
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and consistent with the provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.), it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Each advisory committee listed below is continued until September 30, 2007.
(a) Committee for the Preservation of the White House; Executive Order 11145, as amended (Department of the Interior).
(b) National Infrastructure Advisory Council; section 3 of Executive Order 13231, as amended (Department of Homeland Security).
(c) Federal Advisory Council on Occupational Safety and Health; Executive Order 12196, as amended (Department of Labor).
(d) President's Board of Advisors on Historically Black Colleges and Universities; Executive Order 13256 (Department of Education).
(e) President's Board of Advisors on Tribal Colleges and Universities; Executive Order 13270 (Department of Education).
(f) President's Commission on White House Fellowships; Executive Order 11183, as amended (Office of Personnel Management).
(g) President's Committee for People with Intellectual Disabilities; Executive Order 12994, as amended (Department of Health and Human Services).
(h) President's Committee on the Arts and the Humanities; Executive Order 12367, as amended (National Endowment for the Arts).
(i) President's Committee on the International Labor Organization; Executive Order 12216, as amended (Department of Labor).
(j) President's Committee on the National Medal of Science; Executive Order 11287, as amended (National Science Foundation).
(k) President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology; Executive Order 13226, as amended (Office of Science and Technology Policy).
(l) President's Council on Bioethics; Executive Order 13237 (Department of Health and Human Services).
(m) President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports; Executive Order 13265 (Department of Health and Human Services).
(n) President's Export Council; Executive Order 12131, as amended (Department of Commerce).
(o) President's National Security Telecommunications Advisory Committee; Executive Order 12382, as amended (Department of Homeland Security).
(p) Trade and Environment Policy Advisory Committee; Executive Order 12905 (Office of the United States Trade Representative).
Sec. 2. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other Executive Order, the functions of the President under the Federal Advisory Committee Act that are applicable to the committees listed in section 1 of this order shall be performed by the head of the department or agency designated after Start Printed Page 57990each committee, in accordance with the guidelines and procedures established by the Administrator of General Services.
Sec. 3. The following Executive Orders that established committees that have terminated or whose work is completed are revoked:
(a) Executive Order 13328, establishing the Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the United States Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction; and
(b) Executive Order 13326, establishing the President's Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy.
Sec. 4. Sections 1 and 2 of Executive Order 13316 are superseded by sections 1 and 2 of this order.
Sec. 5. Section 3 of Executive Order 13231, as amended, is further amended by striking section 3, except subsection (c) thereof, and inserting immediately preceding subsection (c), the following:
“Sec. 3.
The National Infrastructure Advisory Council. The National Infrastructure Advisory Council (NIAC), established on October 16, 2001, shall provide the President through the Secretary of Homeland Security with advice on the security of the critical infrastructure sectors and their information systems.
(a) Membership. The NIAC shall be composed of not more than 30 members appointed by the President, taking appropriate account of the benefits of having members (i) from the private sector, including but not limited to banking and finance, transportation, energy, communications, and emergency services organizations and institutions of higher learning, and State, local, and tribal governments, (ii) with senior leadership responsibilities for the reliability and availability, which include security, of the critical infrastructure and key resource sectors, (iii) with expertise relevant to the functions of the NIAC, and (iv) with experience equivalent to that of a chief executive of an organization. Unless otherwise determined by the President, no full-time officer or employee of the executive branch shall be appointed to serve as a member of the NIAC. The President shall designate from among the members of the NIAC a Chair and a Vice Chair, who shall perform the functions of the Chair if the Chair is absent, disabled, or in the instance of a vacancy in the Chair.
(b) Functions of the NIAC. The NIAC shall meet periodically to:
(i) enhance the partnership of the public and private sectors in protecting critical infrastructures and their information systems and provide reports on this issue to the President through the Secretary of Homeland Security, as appropriate;
(ii) propose and develop ways to encourage private industry to perform periodic risk assessments;
(iii) monitor the development and operations of private sector coordinating councils and their information sharing mechanisms and provide recommendations to the President through the Secretary of Homeland Security on how these organizations can best foster improved cooperation among the sectors, the Department of Homeland Security, and other Federal Government entities;
(iv) report to the President through the Secretary of Homeland Security, who shall ensure appropriate coordination with the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and Counterterrorism, the Assistant to the President for Economic Policy, and the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs under the terms of this order; and
(v) advise sector specific agencies with critical infrastructure responsibilities to include issues pertaining to sector and government coordinating councils and their information sharing mechanisms.”
In implementing this order, the NIAC shall not advise or otherwise act on matters pertaining to National Security and Emergency Preparedness Start Printed Page 57991(NS/EP) Communications and, with respect to any matters to which the NIAC is authorized by this order to provide advice or otherwise act on that may depend upon or affect NS/EP Communications, shall coordinate with the National Security and Telecommunications Advisory Committee established by Executive Order 12382, as amended.
Sec. 6. Executive Order 12367, as amended, is further amended by:
(a) Striking “including the Millennium” in section 2;
(b) Changing the title of section 3 to read “Administrative and Project Support”; and
(c) Adding the following new subsection 3(c):
(c) Additional project support may be provided, to the extent permitted by law, by the Director of the Institute of Museum and Library Services after consultation with the Chairpersons of the National Endowment for the Arts and the National Endowment for the Humanities.”.
Sec. 7. Executive Order 12216, as amended, is further amended by revising subsection 1-101 to read as follows:
“1-101. There is established the President's Committee on the International Labor Organization (ILO). The members will be the Secretaries of Labor, State, and Commerce, the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, the Assistant to the President for Economic Policy, and one representative each from organized labor and the business community, to be designated by the Secretary of Labor.”
Sec. 8. Executive Order 13226, as amended, is further amended by:
(a) Striking “not more than 25 members,” in section 1 and inserting in lieu thereof “not more than 45 members,”;
(b) Striking “24 of whom” in section 1 and inserting in lieu thereof “44 of whom”; and
(c) Adding the following new subsection 2(d):
“(d) PCAST shall serve as the President's Information Technology Advisory Committee under subsections 101(b) and 103(b) of the High-Performance Computing Act of 1991 (Public Law 102-194), as amended (15 U.S.C. 5511(b) and 5513(b)).”.
Sec. 9. Executive Order 13283 is revoked.
Sec. 10. This order shall be effective September 30, 2005.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 58289
Executive Order 13386 of September 30, 2005
Further Amendment to Executive Order 13369, Relating to the President's Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to further extend the reporting deadline of the President's Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Section 5 of Executive Order 13369 of January 7, 2005, as amended by Executive Order 13379 of June 16, 2005, is further amended by deleting “September 30, 2005” and inserting in lieu thereof “November 1, 2005”.
Sec. 2. Section 7 of Executive Order 13369 of January 7, 2005, is further amended by deleting “30 days after submitting its report pursuant to section 5 of this order” and inserting in lieu thereof “November 15, 2005”.
Sec. 3. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13387 of October 14, 2005
2005 Amendments to the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including chapter 47 of title 10, United States Code (Uniform Code of Military Justice, 10 U.S.C. 801-946), and in order to prescribe amendments to the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, prescribed by Executive Order 12473, as amended, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Part II of the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, is amended as follows:
(a) R.C.M. 103(2) is amended by replacing the word “without” with the word “with” and by replacing the word “noncapital” with the word “capital”.
(b) R.C.M. 201(e)(2)(B) is amended by adding the word “general” between the words “convene” and “courts-martial” and by inserting the following words after “armed forces”:
“assigned or attached to a combatant command or joint command”.
(c) R.C.M. 201(e)(2)(C) is amended by inserting the words “assigned or attached to a joint command or joint task force,” immediately before the words “under regulations which the superior command may prescribe”.
(d) R.C.M. 201(e)(3) is amended by inserting the following immediately after the words “armed force”:
“, using the implementing regulations and procedures prescribed by the Secretary concerned of the military service of the accused,”.
(e) R.C.M. 201(e)(4) is amended by adding the words “, member, or counsel” after the words “military judge”.
(f) R.C.M. 201(f)(1)(A)(iii)(b) is amended to read as follows:
“(b) The case has not been referred with a special instruction that the case is to be tried as capital.”
(g) R.C.M. 307(c)(4) is amended by inserting the following at the end thereof:
“What is substantially one transaction should not be made the basis for an unreasonable multiplication of charges against one person.”
(h) R.C.M. 501(a)(1) is amended to read as follows:
“(1) General courts-martial.
(A) Except in capital cases, general courts-martial shall consist of a military judge and not less than five members, or of the military judge alone if requested and approved under R.C.M. 903.
(B) In all capital cases, general courts-martial shall consist of a military judge and no fewer than 12 members, unless 12 members are not reasonably available because of physical conditions or military exigencies. If 12 members are not reasonably available, the convening authority shall detail the next lesser number of reasonably available members under 12, but in no event fewer than five. In such a case, the convening authority shall state in the convening order the reasons why 12 members are not reasonably available.”Start Printed Page 60698
(i) R.C.M. 503(a)(3) is amended by deleting “court-martial” and inserting “courts-martial” in lieu thereof.
(j) R.C.M. 503(b)(3) is amended by inserting the words “, a combatant command or joint command” after the words “A military judge from one armed force may be detailed to a court-martial convened in a different armed force”.
(k) R.C.M. 503(c)(3) is amended by inserting the words “, a combatant command or joint command” after the words “A person from one armed force may be detailed to serve as counsel in a court-martial in a different armed force”.
(l) R.C.M. 504, (b)(2)(A) is amended by inserting the following at the end thereof:
“A subordinate joint command or joint task force is ordinarily considered to be “separate or detached.””
(m) R.C.M. 504, (b)(2)(B) is amended by deleting the word “or” at the end of the first element thereof, by deleting the period and adding “ ; or” at the end of the second element thereof, and by inserting the following as a third element:
“(iii) In a combatant command or joint command, by the officer exercising general court-martial jurisdiction over the command.”
(n) R.C.M. 805(b) is amended by replacing the current second sentence with the following:
“No general court-martial proceeding requiring the presence of members may be conducted unless at least five members are present, or in capital cases, at least 12 members are present except as provided in R.C.M. 501(a)(1)(B), where 12 members are not reasonably available because of physical conditions or military exigencies. No special court-martial proceeding requiring the presence of members may be conducted unless at least three members are present except as provided in R.C.M. 912(h).”
(o) R.C.M. 912(f)(4) is amended by deleting the fifth sentence and by inserting the following words immediately after the words “When a challenge for cause has been denied” in the fourth sentence:
“the successful use of a peremptory challenge by either party, excusing the challenged member from further participation in the court-martial, shall preclude further consideration of the challenge of that excused member upon later review. Further,”
(p) R.C.M. 1003(b)(2) is amended by replacing the word “foreign” with the word “hardship.”
(q) R.C.M. 1004(b) is amended by inserting the following after “(1) Notice.” and before the word “Before”:
“(A) Referral. The convening authority shall indicate that the case is to be tried as a capital case by including a special instruction in the referral block of the charge sheet. Failure to include this special instruction at the time of the referral shall not bar the convening authority from later adding the required special instruction, provided:
(i) that the convening authority has otherwise complied with the notice requirement of subsection (B); and
(ii) that if the accused demonstrates specific prejudice from such failure to include the special instruction, a continuance or a recess is an adequate remedy.
(B) Arraignment.”
(r) Insert the following new R.C.M. 1103A after R.C.M. 1103:
“Rule 1103A. Sealed exhibits and proceedings.
(a) In general. If the record of trial contains exhibits, proceedings, or other matter ordered sealed by the military judge, the trial counsel shall Start Printed Page 60699cause such materials to be sealed so as to prevent indiscriminate viewing or disclosure. Trial counsel shall ensure that such materials are properly marked, including an annotation that the material was sealed by order of the military judge, and inserted at the appropriate place in the original record of trial. Copies of the record shall contain appropriate annotations that matters were sealed by order of the military judge and have been inserted in the original record of trial. This Rule shall be implemented in a manner consistent with Executive Order 12958, as amended, concerning classified national security information.
(b) Examination of sealed exhibits and proceedings. Except as provided in the following subsections to this rule, sealed exhibits may not be examined.
(1) Examination of sealed matters. For the purpose of this rule, “examination” includes reading, viewing, photocopying, photographing, disclosing, or manipulating the documents in any way.
(2) Prior to authentication. Prior to authentication of the record by the military judge, sealed materials may not be examined in the absence of an order from the military judge based on good cause shown.
(3) Authentication through action. After authentication and prior to disposition of the record of trial pursuant to Rule for Courts-Martial 1111, sealed materials may not be examined in the absence of an order from the military judge upon a showing of good cause at a post-trial Article 39a session directed by the Convening Authority.
(4) Reviewing and appellate authorities.
(A) Reviewing and appellate authorities may examine sealed matters when those authorities determine that such action is reasonably necessary to a proper fulfillment of their responsibilities under the Uniform Code of Military Justice, the Manual for Courts-Martial, governing directives, instructions, regulations, applicable rules for practice and procedure, or rules of professional responsibility.
(B) Reviewing and appellate authorities shall not, however, disclose sealed matter or information in the absence of:
(i) Prior authorization of the Judge Advocate General in the case of review under Rule for Courts-Martial 1201(b); or
(ii) Prior authorization of the appellate court before which a case is pending review under Rules for Courts-Martial 1203 and 1204.
(C) In those cases in which review is sought or pending before the United States Supreme Court, authorization to disclose sealed materials or information shall be obtained under that Court's rules of practice and procedure.
(D) The authorizing officials in paragraph (B)(ii) above may place conditions on authorized disclosures in order to minimize the disclosure.
(E) For purposes of this rule, reviewing and appellate authorities are limited to:
(i) Judge advocates reviewing records pursuant to Rule for Courts-Martial 1112;
(ii) Officers and attorneys in the office of the Judge Advocate General reviewing records pursuant to Rule for Courts-Martial 1201(b);
(iii) Appellate government counsel;
(iv) Appellate defense counsel;
(v) Appellate judges of the Courts of Criminal Appeals and their professional staffs;
(vi) The judges of the United States Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces and their professional staffs;
(vii) The Justices of the United States Supreme Court and their professional staffs; andStart Printed Page 60700
(viii) Any other court of competent jurisdiction.”
(s) R.C.M. 1301(a) is amended by inserting the following after the second sentence:
“Summary courts-martial shall be conducted in accordance with the regulations of the military service to which the accused belongs.”
Sec. 2. Part III of the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, is amended as follows:
Mil. R. Evid. 317(b) is amended by replacing the word “Transportation” with the words “Homeland Security.”
Sec. 3. Part IV of the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, is amended as follows:
(a) Paragraph 14c(2)(a) is amended by inserting the following new subparagraph (ii) and renumbering existing subparagraphs (a)(ii) through (iv) as (a)(iii) through (v):
“(ii) Determination of lawfulness. The lawfulness of an order is a question of law to be determined by the military judge.”
(b) Paragraph 16(c)(1)(a) is amended by replacing the word “Transportation” with the words “Homeland Security”.
(c) Paragraph 35a is amended to read as follows:
“a. Text.
(a) Any person subject to this chapter who—
(1) operates or physically controls any vehicle, aircraft, or vessel in a reckless or wanton manner or while impaired by a substance described in section 912a(b) of this title (Article 112a(b)), or
(2) operates or is in actual physical control of any vehicle, aircraft, or vessel while drunk or when the alcohol concentration in the person's blood or breath is equal to or exceeds the level prohibited under subsection (b), as shown by chemical analysis, shall be punished as a court-martial may direct.
(b)(1) For purposes of subsection (a), the applicable level of the alcohol concentration in a person's blood or breath is as follows:
(A) In the case of the operation or control of a vehicle, aircraft, or vessel in the United States, the level is the blood alcohol concentration prohibited under the law of the State in which the conduct occurred, except as may be provided under paragraph (b)(2) for conduct on a military installation that is in more than one State, or the prohibited alcohol concentration level specified in paragraph (b)(3).
(B) In the case of the operation or control of a vehicle, aircraft, or vessel outside the United States, the level is the blood alcohol concentration specified in paragraph (b)(3) or such lower level as the Secretary of Defense may by regulation prescribe.
(2) In the case of a military installation that is in more than one State, if those States have different levels for defining their prohibited blood alcohol concentrations under their respective State laws, the Secretary concerned for the installation may select one such level to apply uniformly on that installation.
(3) For purposes of paragraph (b)(1), the level of alcohol concentration prohibited in a person's blood is 0.10 grams or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood and with respect to alcohol concentration in a person's breath is 0.10 grams or more of alcohol per 210 liters of breath, as shown by chemical analysis.”
(4) In this subsection, the term “United States” includes the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, and American Samoa, and the term “State” includes each of those jurisdictions.”Start Printed Page 60701
(d) Paragraph 35b(2)(c) is amended to read as follows:
“(c) the alcohol concentration level in the accused's blood or breath, as shown by chemical analysis, was equal to or exceeded the applicable level provided in paragraph 35a above.”
(e) Paragraph 35f is amended as follows:
“In that ______(personal jurisdiction data), did (at/on board—required), on or about 20___, (in the motor pool area) (near the Officer's Club) (at the intersection of ___ and ___) (while in the Gulf of Mexico) (while in flight over North America) physically control [a vehicle, to wit: (a truck) (a passenger car) (___)] [an aircraft, to wit: (an AH-64 helicopter)(an F-14A fighter)(a KC-135 tanker) (___)] [a vessel, to wit: (the aircraft carrier USS ___) (the Coast Guard Cutter) (___)], [while drunk] [while impaired by ___] [while the alcohol concentration in his (blood)(breath) was, as shown by chemical analysis, equal to or exceeded (.10) (___) grams of alcohol per (100 milliliters of blood) (210 liters of breath), which is the limit under (cite applicable State law) (cite applicable statute or regulation)] [in a (reckless) (wanton) manner by (attempting to pass another vehicle on a sharp curve) (by ordering that the aircraft be flown below the authorized altitude)] [and did thereby cause said (vehicle) (aircraft) (vessel) to (strike and) (injure ______ )].”
(f) Paragraph 97 is amended by (1) inserting the following new subparagraph (b)(2) and renumbering the existing subparagraphs (b)(2) and (b)(3) as (b)(3) and (b)(4); (2) adding the words “and patronizing a prostitute” after the word “Prostitution” in subparagraph (e)(1); and (3) inserting the following new subparagraph (f)(2) and renumbering the existing subparagraphs (f)(2) and (f)(3) as (f)(3) and (f)(4):
“(b)(2) Patronizing a prostitute.
(a) That the accused had sexual intercourse with another person not the accused's spouse;
(b) That the accused compelled, induced, enticed, or procured such person to engage in an act of sexual intercourse in exchange for money or other compensation; and
(c) That this act was wrongful; and
(d) That, under the circumstances, the conduct of the accused was to the prejudice of good order and discipline in the armed forces or was of a nature to bring discredit upon the armed forces.”
“(f)(2) Patronizing a prostitute.
In that ___ (personal jurisdiction data), did, (at/on board—location) (subject-matter jurisdiction data, if required), on or about ___20___, wrongfully (compel) (induce) (entice) (procure) ___ , a person not his/her spouse, to engage in (an act) (acts) of sexual intercourse with the accused in exchange for (money) (______).”
(g) Paragraph 109 is amended to read as follows:
“109. ARTICLE 134—(Threat or hoax designed or intended to cause panic or public fear)
a. Text. See paragraph 60.
b. Elements.
(1) Threat.
(a) That the accused communicated certain language;
(b) That the information communicated amounted to a threat;
(c) That the harm threatened was to be done by means of an explosive; weapon of mass destruction; biological or chemical agent, substance, or weapon; or hazardous material;
(d) That the communication was wrongful; andStart Printed Page 60702
(e) That, under the circumstances, the conduct of the accused was to the prejudice of good order and discipline in the armed forces or was of a nature to bring discredit upon the armed forces.
(2) Hoax.
(a) That the accused communicated or conveyed certain information;
(b) That the information communicated or conveyed concerned an attempt being made or to be made by means of an explosive; weapon of mass destruction; biological or chemical agent, substance, or weapon; or hazardous material, to unlawfully kill, injure, or intimidate a person or to unlawfully damage or destroy certain property;
(c) That the information communicated or conveyed by the accused was false and that the accused then knew it to be false;
(d) That the communication of the information by the accused was malicious; and
(e) That, under the circumstances, the conduct of the accused was to the prejudice of good order and discipline in the armed forces or was of a nature to bring discredit upon the armed forces.
c. Explanation.
(1) Threat. A “threat” means an expressed present determination or intent to kill, injure, or intimidate a person or to damage or destroy certain property presently or in the future. Proof that the accused actually intended to kill, injure, intimidate, damage, or destroy is not required.
(2) Explosive. “Explosive” means gunpowder, powders used for blasting, all forms of high explosives, blasting materials, fuses (other than electrical circuit breakers), detonators, and other detonating agents, smokeless powders, any explosive bomb, grenade, missile, or similar device, and any incendiary bomb or grenade, fire bomb, or similar device, and any other explosive compound, mixture, or similar material.
(3) Weapon of mass destruction. A weapon of mass destruction means any device, explosive or otherwise, that is intended, or has the capability, to cause death or serious bodily injury to a significant number of people through the release, dissemination, or impact of: toxic or poisonous chemicals, or their precursors; a disease organism; or radiation or radioactivity.
(4) Biological agent. The term “biological agent” means 12 any micro-organism (including bacteria, viruses, fungi, rickettsiac, or protozoa), pathogen, or infectious substance, and any naturally occurring, bioengineered, or synthesized component of any such micro-organism, pathogen, or infectious substance, whatever its origin or method of production, that is capable of causing—
(a) death, disease, or other biological malfunction in a human, an animal, a plant, or another living organism;
(b) deterioration of food, water, equipment, supplies, or materials of any kind; or
(c) deleterious alteration of the environment.
(5) Chemical agent, substance, or weapon. A chemical agent, substance, or weapon refers to a toxic chemical and its precursors or a munition or device, specifically designed to cause death or other harm through toxic properties of those chemicals that would be released as a result of the employment of such munition or device, and any equipment specifically designed for use directly in connection with the employment of such munitions or devices.
(6) Hazardous material. A substance or material (including explosive, radioactive material, etiologic agent, flammable or combustible liquid or solid, poison, oxidizing or corrosive material, and compressed gas, or mixture thereof) or a group or class of material designated as hazardous by the Secretary of Transportation.Start Printed Page 60703
(7) Malicious. A communication is “malicious” if the accused believed that the information would probably interfere with the peaceful use of the building, vehicle, aircraft, or other property concerned, or would cause fear or concern to one or more persons.
d. Lesser included offenses.
(1) Threat
(a) Article 134—communicating a threat
(b) Article 80—attempts
(c) Article 128—assault
(2) Hoax. Article 80—attempts
e. Maximum punishment. Dishonorable discharge, forfeitures of all pay and allowances, and confinement for 10 years.
f. Sample specifications.
(1) Threat.
In that ______ (personal jurisdiction data) did, (at/on board—location) on or about _____20___, wrongfully communicate certain information, to wit: ______, which language constituted a threat to harm a person or property by means of a(n) [explosive; weapon of mass destruction; biological agent, substance, or weapon; chemical agent, substance, or weapon; and/or (a) hazardous material(s)].
(2) Hoax.
In that ______ (personal jurisdiction data) did, (at/on board—location), on or about ______20____, maliciously (communicate) (convey) certain information concerning an attempt being made or to be made to unlawfully [(kill) (injure) (intimidate) ______] [(damage) (destroy) ______] by means of a(n) [explosive; weapon of mass destruction; biological agent, substance, or weapon; chemical agent, substance, or weapon; and/or (a) hazardous material(s)], to wit: ___, which information was false and which the accused then knew to be false.”
Sec. 4. Part V of the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, is amended as follows:
(a) Paragraph 1(h) is amended by redesignating existing paragraph 1(h) as 1(i) and inserting the following new paragraph 1(h):
“h. Applicable standards. Unless otherwise provided, the service regulations and procedures of the servicemember shall apply.”
(b) Paragraph 2(a) is amended by replacing the words “Unless otherwise” with the word “As”.
(c) Paragraph 2(a) is amended by inserting the following after the second sentence:
“Commander includes a commander of a joint command.”
(d) Paragraph 2(a) is amended by inserting the words “of a commander” in the third sentence after the words “the authority.”
Sec. 5. These amendments shall take effect 30 days from the date of this order.
(a) Nothing in these amendments shall be construed to make punishable any act done or omitted prior to the effective date of this order that was not punishable when done or omitted.
(b) Nothing in these amendments shall be construed to invalidate any nonjudicial punishment proceeding, restraint, investigation, referral of charges, trial in which arraignment occurred, or other action begun prior to the effective date of this order, and any such nonjudicial punishment proceeding, restraint, investigation, referral of charges, trial, or other action Start Printed Page 60704may proceed in the same manner and with the same effect as if these amendments had not been prescribed.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
October 14, 2005.
Start Printed Page 60705
Start Printed Page 60706
Start Printed Page 60707
Start Printed Page 60708
Start Printed Page 60709
Start Printed Page 60710
Start Printed Page 60711
Start Printed Page 60712
Start Printed Page 60713
Start Printed Page 60714
Executive Order 13388 of October 25, 2005
Further Strengthening the Sharing of Terrorism Information To Protect Americans
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 1016 of the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 (Public Law 108-458), and in order to further strengthen the effective conduct of United States counterterrorism activities and protect the territory, people, and interests of the United States of America, including against terrorist attacks, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. To the maximum extent consistent with applicable law, agencies shall, in the design and use of information systems and in the dissemination of information among agencies:
(a) give the highest priority to (i) the detection, prevention, disruption, preemption, and mitigation of the effects of terrorist activities against the territory, people, and interests of the United States of America; (ii) the interchange of terrorism information among agencies; (iii) the interchange of terrorism information between agencies and appropriate authorities of State, local, and tribal governments, and between agencies and appropriate private sector entities; and (iv) the protection of the ability of agencies to acquire additional such information; and
(b) protect the freedom, information privacy, and other legal rights of Americans in the conduct of activities implementing subsection (a).
Sec. 2.
Duties of Heads of Agencies Possessing or Acquiring Terrorism Information. To implement the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the head of each agency that possesses or acquires terrorism information:
(a) shall promptly give access to the terrorism information to the head of each other agency that has counterterrorism functions, and provide the terrorism information to each such agency, unless otherwise directed by the President, and consistent with (i) the statutory responsibilities of the agencies providing and receiving the information; (ii) any guidance issued by the Attorney General to fulfill the policy set forth in subsection 1(b) of this order; and (iii) other applicable law, including sections 102A(g) and (i) of the National Security Act of 1947, section 1016 of the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 (including any policies, procedures, guidelines, rules, and standards issued pursuant thereto), sections 202 and 892 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002, Executive Order 12958 of April 17, 1995, as amended, and Executive Order 13311 of July 29, 2003; and
(b) shall cooperate in and facilitate production of reports based on terrorism information with contents and formats that permit dissemination that maximizes the utility of the information in protecting the territory, people, and interests of the United States.
Sec. 3.
Preparing Terrorism Information for Maximum Distribution. To assist in expeditious and effective implementation by agencies of the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the common standards for the sharing of terrorism information established pursuant to section 3 of Executive Order 13356 of August 27, 2004, shall be used, as appropriate, in carrying out section 1016 of the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004.Start Printed Page 62024
Sec. 4.
Requirements for Collection of Terrorism Information Inside the United States. To assist in expeditious and effective implementation by agencies of the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the recommendations regarding the establishment of executive branch-wide collection and sharing requirements, procedures, and guidelines for terrorism information collected within the United States made pursuant to section 4 of Executive Order 13356 shall be used, as appropriate, in carrying out section 1016 of the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004.
Sec. 5.
Establishment and Functions of Information Sharing Council. (a) Consistent with section 1016(g) of the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004, there is hereby established an Information Sharing Council (Council), chaired by the Program Manager to whom section 1016 of such Act refers, and composed exclusively of designees of: the Secretaries of State, the Treasury, Defense, Commerce, Energy, and Homeland Security; the Attorney General; the Director of National Intelligence; the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency; the Director of the Office of Management and Budget; the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation; the Director of the National Counterterrorism Center; and such other heads of departments or agencies as the Director of National Intelligence may designate.
(b) The mission of the Council is to (i) provide advice and information concerning the establishment of an interoperable terrorism information sharing environment to facilitate automated sharing of terrorism information among appropriate agencies to implement the policy set forth in section 1 of this order; and (ii) perform the duties set forth in section 1016(g) of the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004.
(c) To assist in expeditious and effective implementation by agencies of the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the plan for establishment of a proposed interoperable terrorism information sharing environment reported under section 5(c) of Executive Order 13356 shall be used, as appropriate, in carrying out section 1016 of the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004.
Sec. 6.
Definitions. As used in this order:
(a) the term “agency” has the meaning set forth for the term “executive agency” in section 105 of title 5, United States Code, together with the Department of Homeland Security, but includes the Postal Rate Commission and the United States Postal Service and excludes the Government Accountability Office; and
(b) the term “terrorism information” has the meaning set forth for such term in section 1016(a)(4) of the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004.
Sec. 7.
General Provisions. (a) This order:
(i) shall be implemented in a manner consistent with applicable law, including Federal law protecting the information privacy and other legal rights of Americans, and subject to the availability of appropriations;
(ii) shall be implemented in a manner consistent with the authority of the principal officers of agencies as heads of their respective agencies, including under section 199 of the Revised Statutes (22 U.S.C. 2651), section 201 of the Department of Energy Organization Act (42 U.S.C. 7131), section 103 of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 403-3), section 102(a) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 112(a)), and sections 301 of title 5, 113(b) and 162(b) of title 10, 1501 of title 15, 503 of title 28, and 301(b) of title 31, United States Code;
(iii) shall be implemented consistent with the Presidential Memorandum of June 2, 2005, on “Strengthening Information Sharing, Access, and Integration—Organizational, Management, and Policy Development Structures for Creating the Terrorism Information Sharing Environment;”
(iv) shall not be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, and legislative proposals; andStart Printed Page 62025
(v) shall be implemented in a manner consistent with section 102A of the National Security Act of 1947.
(b) This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and is not intended to, and does not, create any rights or benefits, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
Sec. 8.
Amendments and Revocation. (a) Executive Order 13311 of July 29, 2003, is amended:
(i) by striking “Director of Central Intelligence” each place it appears and inserting in lieu thereof in each such place “Director of National Intelligence”; and
(ii) by striking “103(c)(7)” and inserting in lieu thereof “102A(i)(1)”.
(b) Executive Order 13356 of August 27, 2004, is hereby revoked.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13389 of November 1, 2005
Creation of the Gulf Coast Recovery and Rebuilding Council
By the authority vested in me as President of the United States by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5121-5206) (the “Stafford Act”), and in order to further strengthen Federal support for the recovery and rebuilding of the Gulf Coast region affected by Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Rita, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. It is the policy of the United States to provide effective, integrated, and fiscally responsible support from across the Federal Government to support State, local, and tribal governments, the private sector, and faith-based and other community humanitarian relief organizations in the recovery and rebuilding of the Gulf Coast region affected by Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Rita.
Sec. 2.
Establishment. (a) There is established, within the Executive Office of the President, the Gulf Coast Recovery and Rebuilding Council (the “Council”). The Assistant to the President for Economic Policy shall serve as the Chairman of the Council (the “Chairman”). The Council shall consist exclusively of the following members or full-time Federal officers or employees designated by them, respectively:
(i)
Secretary of the Treasury;
(ii)
Secretary of Defense;
(iii)
Attorney General;
(iv)
Secretary of the Interior;
(v)
Secretary of Agriculture;
(vi)
Secretary of Commerce;
(vii)
Secretary of Labor;
(viii)
Secretary of Health and Human Services;
(ix)
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development;
(x)
Secretary of Transportation;
(xi)
Secretary of Energy;
(xii)
Secretary of Education;
(xiii)
Secretary of Veterans Affairs;
(xiv)
Secretary of Homeland Security;
(xv)
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency;
(xvi)
Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers;
(xvii)
Administrator of the Small Business Administration;
(xviii)
Director of the Office of Management and Budget;
(xix)
Coordinator of Federal Support for the Recovery and Rebuilding of the Gulf Coast Region;
(xx)
Assistant to the President for Economic Policy;
(xxi)
Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy;Start Printed Page 67326
(xxii)
Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and Counterterrorism; and
(xxiii)
Such other officers and employees of the executive branch as the Chairman may from time to time designate.
(b) The Chairman, in consultation with the Coordinator, shall convene and preside over meetings of the Council, determine its agenda, direct its work, and, as appropriate to particular subject matters, establish and direct subgroups of the Council, which shall consist of Council members or their designees under subsection 2(a) of this order, and including those officers and employees of the executive branch as designated by the Chairman.
Sec. 3.
Functions of Council. The Council shall:
(a) at the request of the Chairman, the Coordinator of Federal Support for the Recovery and Rebuilding of the Gulf Coast Region, or any agency head who is a member of the Council (subject to the approval of the Chairman), promptly review and provide advice and guidance, for the purpose of furthering the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, regarding any issue relating to the implementation of that policy;
(b) make recommendations to the President, as appropriate, regarding any issue considered by the Council pursuant to section 3(a) of this order; and
(c) give no vote or veto over the activities or advice of the Council to any individual to whom subsection (b) of this section refers.
Sec. 4.
General. (a) To the extent permitted by law:
(i)
agencies shall assist and provide information to the Council for the performance of its functions under this order; and
(ii)
the Director of the Office of Administration shall provide or arrange for the provision of administrative support to the Council.
(b) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(c) This order shall be implemented in a manner consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(d) This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
Sec. 5.
Termination. The Council shall terminate 3 years from the date of this order, unless extended by the President.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 67327
Executive Order 13390 of November 1, 2005
Establishment of a Coordinator of Federal Support for the Recovery and Rebuilding of the Gulf Coast Region
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 101 et seq.) and the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5121-5206) (the “Stafford Act”), and to further strengthen Federal support for the recovery and rebuilding of the Gulf Coast region affected by Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Rita, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. It is the policy of the United States to provide effective, integrated, and fiscally responsible support from across the Federal Government to support State, local, and tribal governments, the private sector, and faith-based and other community humanitarian relief organizations in the recovery and rebuilding of the Gulf Coast region affected by Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Rita (the “Federal Response”).
Sec. 2.
Establishment of Coordinator. The Secretary of Homeland Security (Secretary) shall establish in the Department of Homeland Security the position of Coordinator of Federal Support for the Recovery and Rebuilding of the Gulf Coast Region (Coordinator). The Coordinator shall be selected by the President and shall be appointed by and report directly to the Secretary. The Secretary shall make available to the Coordinator such personnel, funds, and other resources as may be appropriate to enable the Coordinator to carry out the Coordinator's mission.
Sec. 3.
Mission and Functions of Coordinator. (a) The Coordinator's mission shall be to work with executive departments and agencies to ensure the proper implementation of the policy set forth in section 1 of this order by coordinating the Federal Response. The Coordinator shall be the principal point of contact for the President and his senior advisors with respect to the Federal Response.
(b) Working with the input of all appropriate heads of executive departments and agencies, the Coordinator shall lead the process to develop the principles governing and define the goals of the Federal Response. The Coordinator shall communicate those principles and goals to all Federal officials involved in the Federal Response.
(c) Working with the input of all appropriate heads of executive departments and agencies, the Coordinator shall lead the development and monitor the implementation of the specific policies and programs that constitute the Federal Response, and ensure that those polices and programs are consistent with the principles and goals of the Federal Response.
(d) The Coordinator shall serve as the primary point of contact within the executive branch with the Congress, State and local governments, the private sector, and community leaders regarding the Federal Response. Working with the input of all appropriate heads of executive departments and agencies, the Coordinator shall be responsible for managing information flow, requests for actions, and discussions regarding the Federal Response with the Congress, State and local governments, the private sector, and community leaders.
Sec. 4.
Duties of Heads of Departments and Agencies. Heads of executive departments and agencies shall respond promptly to any request by the Start Printed Page 67328Coordinator, and shall, consistent with applicable law, provide such information as the Coordinator deems necessary to carry out the Coordinator's mission, and shall otherwise cooperate with the Coordinator to the greatest extent practicable to facilitate the performance of the Coordinator's mission.
Sec. 5.
General Provisions. (a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(i) authority granted by law to an agency or the head thereof;
(ii) the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals; or
(iii) the chain of command over the Armed Forces provided in section 162(b) of title 10, United States Code.
(b) This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law, subject to the availability of appropriations, and shall terminate 3 years from the date of this order.
(c) As used in this order, the term “agency” has the meaning set forth for the term “executive agency” in section 105 of title 5, United States Code, excluding the Government Accountability Office.
(d) This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13391 of November 22, 2005
Blocking Property of Additional Persons Undermining Democratic Processes or Institutions in Zimbabwe
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and in order to take additional steps with respect to the continued actions and policies of certain persons who undermine Zimbabwe's democratic processes and with respect to the national emergency described and declared in Executive Order 13288 of March 6, 2003,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, hereby order:
Section 1. The Annex to Executive Order 13288 of March 6, 2003, is replaced and superseded in its entirety by the Annex to this order.
Sec. 2. Section 6 of Executive Order 13288 is renumbered as section 8. Sections 1 through 5 of Executive Order 13288 are replaced with new sections 1 through 7 as follows:
“Section 1. (a) Except to the extent provided in section 203(b)(1), (3), and (4) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(1), (3), and (4)), and in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date of this order, all property and interests in property of the following persons, that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of United States persons, including their overseas branches, are blocked and may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in:
(i) the persons listed in the Annex to this order; and
(ii) any person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State:
(A) to have engaged in actions or policies to undermine Zimbabwe's democratic processes or institutions;
(B) to have materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services in support of, such actions or policies or any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order;
(C) to be or have been an immediate family member of any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order; or
(D) to be owned or controlled by, or acting or purporting to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order.
(b) I hereby determine that the making of donations of the type of articles specified in section 203(b)(2) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)) by, to, or for the benefit of any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section would seriously impair my ability to deal with the national emergency declared in this order, and I hereby prohibit such donations as provided by paragraph (a) of this section.Start Printed Page 71202
(c) The prohibitions in paragraph (a) of this section include but are not limited to (i) the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order, and (ii) the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.
Sec. 2. (a) Any transaction by a United States person or within the United States that evades or avoids, has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
(b) Any conspiracy formed to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
Sec. 3. For the purposes of this order:
(a) the term “person” means an individual or entity;
(b) the term “entity” means a partnership, association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization; and
(c) the term “United States person” means any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States.
Sec. 4. For those persons whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order who might have a constitutional presence in the United States, I find that, because of the ability to transfer funds or other assets instantaneously, prior notice to such persons of measures to be taken pursuant to this order would render these measures ineffectual. I therefore determine that, for these measures to be effective in addressing the national emergency declared in this order, there need be no prior notice of a listing or determination made pursuant to section 1(a) of this order.
Sec. 5. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA, as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government, consistent with applicable law. All agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order and, where appropriate, to advise the Secretary of the Treasury in a timely manner of the measures taken.
Sec. 6. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to determine, subsequent to the issuance of this order, that circumstances no longer warrant the inclusion of a person in the Annex to this order and that the property and interests in property of that person are therefore no longer blocked pursuant to section 1(a) of this order.
Sec. 7. This order is not intended to create, nor does it create, any right, benefit, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.”
Sec. 3. This order is not intended to create, nor does it create, any right, benefit, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
Sec. 4. This order shall take effect at 12:01 a.m. eastern standard time, November 23, 2005.Start Printed Page 71203
Sec. 5. This order shall be transmitted to the Congress and published in the Federal Register.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
November 22, 2005.
Start Printed Page 71204
Start Printed Page 71205
Start Printed Page 71206
Start Printed Page 71207
Start Printed Page 71208
Start Printed Page 71209
Executive Order 13392 of December 14, 2005
Improving Agency Disclosure of Information
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to ensure appropriate agency disclosure of information, and consistent with the goals of section 552 of title 5, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy.
(a) The effective functioning of our constitutional democracy depends upon the participation in public life of a citizenry that is well informed. For nearly four decades, the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) has provided an important means through which the public can obtain information regarding the activities of Federal agencies. Under the FOIA, the public can obtain records from any Federal agency, subject to the exemptions enacted by the Congress to protect information that must be held in confidence for the Government to function effectively or for other purposes.
(b) FOIA requesters are seeking a service from the Federal Government and should be treated as such. Accordingly, in responding to a FOIA request, agencies shall respond courteously and appropriately. Moreover, agencies shall provide FOIA requesters, and the public in general, with citizen-centered ways to learn about the FOIA process, about agency records that are publicly available (e.g., on the agency's website), and about the status of a person's FOIA request and appropriate information about the agency's response.
(c) Agency FOIA operations shall be both results-oriented and produce results. Accordingly, agencies shall process requests under the FOIA in an efficient and appropriate manner and achieve tangible, measurable improvements in FOIA processing. When an agency's FOIA program does not produce such results, it should be reformed, consistent with available resources appropriated by the Congress and applicable law, to increase efficiency and better reflect the policy goals and objectives of this order.
(d) A citizen-centered and results-oriented approach will improve service and performance, thereby strengthening compliance with the FOIA, and will help avoid disputes and related litigation.
Sec. 2.
Agency Chief FOIA Officers.
(a) Designation. The head of each agency shall designate within 30 days of the date of this order a senior official of such agency (at the Assistant Secretary or equivalent level), to serve as the Chief FOIA Officer of that agency. The head of the agency shall promptly notify the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB Director) and the Attorney General of such designation and of any changes thereafter in such designation.
(b) General Duties. The Chief FOIA Officer of each agency shall, subject to the authority of the head of the agency:
(i) have agency-wide responsibility for efficient and appropriate compliance with the FOIA;
(ii) monitor FOIA implementation throughout the agency, including through the use of meetings with the public to the extent deemed appropriate by the agency's Chief FOIA Officer, and keep the head of the agency, the chief legal officer of the agency, and the Attorney General appropriately informed of the agency's performance in implementing the FOIA, including the extent to which the agency meets the milestones Start Printed Page 75374in the agency's plan under section 3(b) of this order and training and reporting standards established consistent with applicable law and this order;
(iii) recommend to the head of the agency such adjustments to agency practices, policies, personnel, and funding as may be necessary to carry out the policy set forth in section 1 of this order;
(iv) review and report, through the head of the agency, at such times and in such formats as the Attorney General may direct, on the agency's performance in implementing the FOIA; and
(v) facilitate public understanding of the purposes of the FOIA's statutory exemptions by including concise descriptions of the exemptions in both the agency's FOIA handbook issued under section 552(g) of title 5, United States Code, and the agency's annual FOIA report, and by providing an overview, where appropriate, of certain general categories of agency records to which those exemptions apply.
(c) FOIA Requester Service Center and FOIA Public Liaisons. In order to ensure appropriate communication with FOIA requesters:
(i) Each agency shall establish one or more FOIA Requester Service Centers (Center), as appropriate, which shall serve as the first place that a FOIA requester can contact to seek information concerning the status of the person's FOIA request and appropriate information about the agency's FOIA response. The Center shall include appropriate staff to receive and respond to inquiries from FOIA requesters;
(ii) The agency Chief FOIA Officer shall designate one or more agency officials, as appropriate, as FOIA Public Liaisons, who may serve in the Center or who may serve in a separate office. FOIA Public Liaisons shall serve as supervisory officials to whom a FOIA requester can raise concerns about the service the FOIA requester has received from the Center, following an initial response from the Center staff. FOIA Public Liaisons shall seek to ensure a service-oriented response to FOIA requests and FOIA-related inquiries. For example, the FOIA Public Liaison shall assist, as appropriate, in reducing delays, increasing transparency and understanding of the status of requests, and resolving disputes. FOIA Public Liaisons shall report to the agency Chief FOIA Officer on their activities and shall perform their duties consistent with applicable law and agency regulations;
(iii) In addition to the services to FOIA requesters provided by the Center and FOIA Public Liaisons, the agency Chief FOIA Officer shall also consider what other FOIA-related assistance to the public should appropriately be provided by the agency;
(iv) In establishing the Centers and designating FOIA Public Liaisons, the agency shall use, as appropriate, existing agency staff and resources. A Center shall have appropriate staff to receive and respond to inquiries from FOIA requesters;
(v) As determined by the agency Chief FOIA Officer, in consultation with the FOIA Public Liaisons, each agency shall post appropriate information about its Center or Centers on the agency's website, including contact information for its FOIA Public Liaisons. In the case of an agency without a website, the agency shall publish the information on the Firstgov.gov website or, in the case of any agency with neither a website nor the capability to post on the Firstgov.gov website, in the Federal Register; and
(vi) The agency Chief FOIA Officer shall ensure that the agency has in place a method (or methods), including through the use of the Center, to receive and respond promptly and appropriately to inquiries from FOIA requesters about the status of their requests. The Chief FOIA Officer shall Start Printed Page 75375also consider, in consultation with the FOIA Public Liaisons, as appropriate, whether the agency's implementation of other means (such as tracking numbers for requests, or an agency telephone or Internet hotline) would be appropriate for responding to status inquiries.
Sec. 3.
Review, Plan, and Report.
(a) Review. Each agency's Chief FOIA Officer shall conduct a review of the agency's FOIA operations to determine whether agency practices are consistent with the policies set forth in section 1 of this order. In conducting this review, the Chief FOIA Officer shall:
(i) evaluate, with reference to numerical and statistical benchmarks where appropriate, the agency's administration of the FOIA, including the agency's expenditure of resources on FOIA compliance and the extent to which, if any, requests for records have not been responded to within the statutory time limit (backlog);
(ii) review the processes and practices by which the agency assists and informs the public regarding the FOIA process;
(iii) examine the agency's:
(A) use of information technology in responding to FOIA requests, including without limitation the tracking of FOIA requests and communication with requesters;
(B) practices with respect to requests for expedited processing; and
(C) implementation of multi-track processing if used by such agency;
(iv) review the agency's policies and practices relating to the availability of public information through websites and other means, including the use of websites to make available the records described in section 552(a)(2) of title 5, United States Code; and
(v) identify ways to eliminate or reduce its FOIA backlog, consistent with available resources and taking into consideration the volume and complexity of the FOIA requests pending with the agency.
(b) Plan.
(i) Each agency's Chief FOIA Officer shall develop, in consultation as appropriate with the staff of the agency (including the FOIA Public Liaisons), the Attorney General, and the OMB Director, an agency-specific plan to ensure that the agency's administration of the FOIA is in accordance with applicable law and the policies set forth in section 1 of this order. The plan, which shall be submitted to the head of the agency for approval, shall address the agency's implementation of the FOIA during fiscal years 2006 and 2007.
(ii) The plan shall include specific activities that the agency will implement to eliminate or reduce the agency's FOIA backlog, including (as applicable) changes that will make the processing of FOIA requests more streamlined and effective, as well as increased reliance on the dissemination of records that can be made available to the public through a website or other means that do not require the public to make a request for the records under the FOIA.
(iii) The plan shall also include activities to increase public awareness of FOIA processing, including as appropriate, expanded use of the agency's Center and its FOIA Public Liaisons.
(iv) The plan shall also include, taking appropriate account of the resources available to the agency and the mission of the agency, concrete milestones, with specific timetables and outcomes to be achieved, by which the head of the agency, after consultation with the OMB Director, shall measure and evaluate the agency's success in the implementation of the plan.
(c) Agency Reports to the Attorney General and OMB Director.
(i) The head of each agency shall submit a report, no later than 6 months from the date of this order, to the Attorney General and the OMB Director that summarizes the results of the review under section 3(a) of this order and encloses a copy of the agency's plan under section 3(b) of this order. Start Printed Page 75376The agency shall publish a copy of the agency's report on the agency's website or, in the case of an agency without a website, on the Firstgov.gov website, or, in the case of any agency with neither a website nor the capability to publish on the Firstgov.gov website, in the Federal Register.
(ii) The head of each agency shall include in the agency's annual FOIA reports for fiscal years 2006 and 2007 a report on the agency's development and implementation of its plan under section 3(b) of this order and on the agency's performance in meeting the milestones set forth in that plan, consistent with any related guidelines the Attorney General may issue under section 552(e) of title 5, United States Code.
(iii) If the agency does not meet a milestone in its plan, the head of the agency shall:
(A) identify this deficiency in the annual FOIA report to the Attorney General;
(B) explain in the annual report the reasons for the agency's failure to meet the milestone;
(C) outline in the annual report the steps that the agency has already taken, and will be taking, to address the deficiency; and
(D) report this deficiency to the President's Management Council.
Sec. 4.
Attorney General.
(a) Report. The Attorney General, using the reports submitted by the agencies under subsection 3(c)(i) of this order and the information submitted by agencies in their annual FOIA reports for fiscal year 2005, shall submit to the President, no later than 10 months from the date of this order, a report on agency FOIA implementation. The Attorney General shall consult the OMB Director in the preparation of the report and shall include in the report appropriate recommendations on administrative or other agency actions for continued agency dissemination and release of public information. The Attorney General shall thereafter submit two further annual reports, by June 1, 2007, and June 1, 2008, that provide the President with an update on the agencies' implementation of the FOIA and of their plans under section 3(b) of this order.
(b) Guidance. The Attorney General shall issue such instructions and guidance to the heads of departments and agencies as may be appropriate to implement sections 3(b) and 3(c) of this order.
Sec. 5.
OMB Director. The OMB Director may issue such instructions to the heads of agencies as are necessary to implement this order, other than sections 3(b) and 3(c) of this order.
Sec. 6.
Definitions. As used in this order:
(a) the term “agency” has the same meaning as the term “agency” under section 552(f)(1) of title 5, United States Code; and
(b) the term “record” has the same meaning as the term “record” under section 552(f)(2) of title 5, United States Code.
Sec. 7.
General Provisions.
(a) The agency reviews under section 3(a) of this order and agency plans under section 3(b) of this order shall be conducted and developed in accordance with applicable law and applicable guidance issued by the President, the Attorney General, and the OMB Director, including the laws and guidance regarding information technology and the dissemination of information.
(b) This order:
(i) shall be implemented in a manner consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations;
(ii) shall not be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the OMB Director relating to budget, legislative, or administrative proposals; and
(iii) is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, Start Printed Page 75377substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 76655
Executive Order 13393 of December 22, 2005
Adjustments of Certain Rates of Pay
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the laws cited herein, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Statutory Pay Systems. The rates of basic pay or salaries of the statutory pay systems (as defined in 5 U.S.C. 5302(1)), as adjusted under 5 U.S.C. 5303(a), are set forth on the schedules attached hereto and made a part hereof:
(a) The General Schedule (5 U.S.C. 5332(a)) at Schedule 1;
(b) The Foreign Service Schedule (22 U.S.C. 3963) at Schedule 2; and
(c) The schedules for the Veterans Health Administration of the Department of Veterans Affairs (38 U.S.C. 7306, 7404; section 301(a) of Public Law 102-40; section 3(d) of Public Law 108-445) at Schedule 3.
Sec. 2.
Senior Executive Service. The ranges of rates of basic pay for senior executives in the Senior Executive Service, as established pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 5382, are set forth on Schedule 4 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 3.
Certain Executive, Legislative, and Judicial Salaries. The rates of basic pay or salaries for the following offices and positions are set forth on the schedules attached hereto and made a part hereof:
(a) The Executive Schedule (5 U.S.C. 5312-5318) at Schedule 5;
(b) The Vice President (3 U.S.C. 104) and the Congress (2 U.S.C. 31) at Schedule 6; and
(c) Justices and judges (28 U.S.C. 5, 44(d), 135, 252, and 461(a), section 140 of Public Law 97-92, and section 405 of Public Law 109-115) at Schedule 7.
Sec. 4.
Uniformed Services. Pursuant to section 601(a)-(b) of Public Law 108-375, the rates of monthly basic pay (37 U.S.C. 203(a)) for members of the uniformed services, as adjusted under 37 U.S.C. 1009, and the rate of monthly cadet or midshipman pay (37 U.S.C. 203(c)) are set forth on Schedule 8 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 5.
Locality-Based Comparability Payments.
(a) Pursuant to section 5304 of title 5, United States Code, and section 843 of Public Law 109-115, locality-based comparability payments shall be paid in accordance with Schedule 9 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
(b) The Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall take such actions as may be necessary to implement these payments and to publish appropriate notice of such payments in the Federal Register.
Sec. 6.
Administrative Law Judges. The rates of basic pay for administrative law judges, as adjusted under 5 U.S.C. 5372(b)(4), are set forth on Schedule 10 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 7.
Effective Dates. Schedule 8 is effective on January 1, 2006. The other schedules contained herein are effective on the first day of the first applicable pay period beginning on or after January 1, 2006.Start Printed Page 76656
Sec. 8.
Prior Order Superseded. Executive Order 13368 of December 30, 2004, is superseded.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
December 22, 2005.
Start Printed Page 76657
Start Printed Page 76658
Start Printed Page 76659
Start Printed Page 76660
Start Printed Page 76661
Start Printed Page 76662
Start Printed Page 76663
Start Printed Page 76665
Executive Order 13394 of December 22, 2005
Providing an Order of Succession Within the Department of Defense
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, 5 U.S.C. 3345 et. seq., it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Subject to the provisions of section 3 of this order, the officers named in section 2, in the order listed, shall act as and perform the functions and duties of the office of the Secretary of Defense (Secretary) during any period when the Secretary has died, resigned, or is otherwise unable to perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary.
Sec. 2.
Order of Succession.
(a) Deputy Secretary of Defense;
(b) Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence;
(c) Under Secretary of Defense for Policy;
(d) Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics;
(e) Secretary of the Army;
(f) Secretary of the Air Force;
(g) Secretary of the Navy;
(h) Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness and the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller);
(i) Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Technology, Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, and Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness;
(j) General Counsel of the Department of Defense, the Assistant Secretaries of Defense, and the Director of Operational Test and Evaluation;
(k) Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Logistics and Material Readiness and the Director of Defense Research and Engineering;
(l) Under Secretaries of the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force; and
(m) Assistant Secretaries of the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force, and General Counsels of the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force.
Sec. 3.
Exceptions. (a) No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 2(a)-(m) in an acting capacity shall act as Secretary pursuant to this order.
(b) Precedence among officers designated within the same subsection of section 2 of this order shall be determined by the order in which they have been appointed to such office by the President. Where officers designated within the same subsection of section 2 of this order are appointed on the same date, precedence will be determined by the order in which they have taken the oath to serve in that office.
(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of this order, the President retains discretion, to the extent permitted by law, to depart from this order in designating an acting Secretary.
Sec. 4.
Judicial Review. This order is intended to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, and does Start Printed Page 76666not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
Sec. 5.
Revocation. Executive Order No. 13000 of April 24, 1996, and the President's memorandum of June 2, 2005, entitled: “Order of Succession of Officers to Act as Secretary of Defense,” are hereby revoked.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 3203
Executive Order 13395 of January 13, 2006
Designating the Global Fund To Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria as a Public International Organization Entitled To Enjoy Certain Privileges, Exemptions, and Immunities
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including sections 1 and 16 of the International Organizations Immunities Act (22 U.S.C. 288 and 288f-6), it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Designation. The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (Global Fund) is hereby designated as a public international organization entitled to enjoy the privileges, exemptions, and immunities provided by the International Organizations Immunities Act.
Sec. 2.
Non-Abridgement. The designation in section 1 is not intended to abridge in any respect privileges, exemptions, or immunities that the Global Fund otherwise may have acquired or may acquire by law.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13396 of February 7, 2006
Blocking Property of Certain Persons Contributing to the Conflict in Côte d'Ivoire
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.)(IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.)(NEA), section 5 of the United Nations Participation Act, as amended (22 U.S.C. 287c)(UNPA), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and to assist in addressing humanitarian, safety, and other concerns in or in relation to the country of Côte d'Ivoire,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, determine that the situation in or in relation to Côte d'Ivoire, which has been addressed by the United Nations Security Council in Resolution 1572 of November 15, 2004, and subsequent resolutions, that has resulted in the massacre of large numbers of civilians, widespread human rights abuses, significant political violence and unrest, and attacks against international peacekeeping forces leading to fatalities, constitutes an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States and hereby declare a national emergency to deal with that threat, and hereby order:
Section 1. (a) Except to the extent that section 203(b)(1), (3), and (4) of the IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(1), (3), and (4)) may apply, or to the extent provided in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date of this order, all property and interests in property that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of any United States person, including any overseas branch, of the following persons are blocked and may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in:
(i) the persons listed in the Annex to this order; and
(ii) any person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State:
(A) to constitute a threat to the peace and national reconciliation process in Côte d'Ivoire, such as by blocking the implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement of January 24, 2003, the Accra III Agreement of July 30, 2004, and the Pretoria Agreement of April 6, 2005;
(B) to be responsible for serious violations of international law in Côte d'Ivoire;
(C) to have directly or indirectly supplied, sold, or transferred to Côte d'Ivoire arms or any related materiel or any assistance, advice, or training related to military activities;
(D) to have publicly incited violence and hatred contributing to the conflict in Côte d'Ivoire;
(E) to have materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services in support of, the activities described in paragraphs (a)(ii)(A), (a)(ii)(B), (a)(ii)(C), or (a)(ii)(D) of this section or any person listed in or designated pursuant to this order; orStart Printed Page 7390
(F) to be owned or controlled by, or acting or purporting to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any person listed in or designated pursuant to this order.
(b) I hereby determine that, to the extent section 203(b)(2) of the IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)) may apply, the making of donations of the type of articles specified in such section by, to, or for the benefit of, any person listed in or designated pursuant to this order would seriously impair my ability to deal with the national emergency declared in this order, and I hereby prohibit such donations as provided by paragraph (a) of this section.
(c) The prohibitions in paragraph (a) of this section include, but are not limited to, (i) the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of, any person listed in or designated pursuant to this order, and (ii) the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.
Sec. 2. (a) Any transaction by a United States person or within the United States that evades or avoids, has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
(b) Any conspiracy formed to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
Sec. 3. For purposes of this order:
(a) the term “entity” means a partnership, association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization;
(b) the term “person” means an individual or entity;
(c) the term “United States person” means any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States; and
(d) the term “arms or any related materiel” means arms or related materiel of all types, including military aircraft and equipment, but excludes:
(i) supplies and technical assistance intended solely for the support of or use by the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire and forces of France who support them;
(ii) supplies of non-lethal military equipment intended solely for humanitarian or protective use, and related technical assistance and training;
(iii) supplies of protective clothing, including flak jackets and military helmets, temporarily exported to Côte d'Ivoire by United Nations personnel, representatives of the media, and humanitarian and development workers and associated personnel, for their personal use only;
(iv) supplies temporarily exported to Côte d'Ivoire to the forces of a country that is taking action solely and directly to facilitate the evacuation of its nationals and those for whom it has consular responsibility in Côte d'Ivoire; and
(v) supplies of arms and related materiel and technical training and assistance intended solely for support of or use in the process of restructuring defense and security forces pursuant to paragraph 3, subparagraph (f) of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement.
Sec. 4. For those persons listed in or designated pursuant to this order who might have a constitutional presence in the United States, I find that because of the ability to transfer funds or other assets instantaneously, prior notice to such persons of measures to be taken pursuant to this order would render these measures ineffectual. I therefore determine that for these measures to be effective in addressing the national emergency declared in this order, there need be no prior notice of a listing or determination made pursuant to section 1 of this order.
Sec. 5. The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation Start Printed Page 7391of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by the IEEPA and the UNPA, as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government, consistent with applicable law. All executive agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order and, where appropriate, to advise the Secretary of the Treasury in a timely manner of the measures taken. The Secretary of the Treasury shall ensure compliance with those provisions of section 401 of the NEA (50 U.S.C. 1641) applicable to the Department of the Treasury in relation to this order.
Sec. 6. The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to submit the recurring and final reports to the Congress on the national emergency declared in this order, consistent with section 401(c) of the NEA (50 U.S.C. 1641(c)) and section 204(c) of the IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1703(c)).
Sec. 7. The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to determine, subsequent to the issuance of this order, that circumstances no longer warrant the inclusion of a person in the Annex to this order and that the property and interests in property of that person are therefore no longer blocked pursuant to section 1 of this order.
Sec. 8. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right, benefit, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
Sec. 9. This order is effective at 12:01 a.m. eastern standard time on February 8, 2006.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
February 7, 2006.
Start Printed Page 7392
Executive Order 13397 of March 7, 2006
Responsibilities of the Department of Homeland Security With Respect to Faith-Based and Community Initiatives
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to help the Federal Government coordinate a national effort to expand opportunities for faith-based and other community organizations and to strengthen their capacity to better meet America's social and community needs, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment of a Center for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives at the Department of Homeland Security.
(a) The Secretary of Homeland Security (Secretary) shall establish within the Department of Homeland Security (Department) a Center for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives (Center).
(b) The Center shall be supervised by a Director appointed by Secretary. The Secretary shall consult with the Director of the White House Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives (WHOFBCI Director) prior to making such appointment.
(c) The Department shall provide the Center with appropriate staff, administrative support, and other resources to meet its responsibilities under this order.
(d) The Center shall begin operations no later than 45 days from the date of this order.
Sec. 2.
Purpose of Center. The purpose of the Center shall be to coordinate agency efforts to eliminate regulatory, contracting, and other programmatic obstacles to the participation of faith-based and other community organizations in the provision of social and community services.
Sec. 3.
Responsibilities of the Center for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives. In carrying out the purpose set forth in section 2 of this order, the Center shall:
(a) conduct, in coordination with the WHOFBCI Director, a department-wide audit to identify all existing barriers to the participation of faith-based and other community organizations in the delivery of social and community services by the Department, including but not limited to regulations, rules, orders, procurement, and other internal policies and practices, and outreach activities that unlawfully discriminate against, or otherwise discourage or disadvantage the participation of faith-based and other community organizations in Federal programs;
(b) coordinate a comprehensive departmental effort to incorporate faith-based and other community organizations in Department programs and initiatives to the greatest extent possible;
(c) propose initiatives to remove barriers identified pursuant to section 3(a) of this order, including but not limited to reform of regulations, procurement, and other internal policies and practices, and outreach activities;
(d) propose the development of innovative pilot and demonstration programs to increase the participation of faith-based and other community organizations in Federal as well as State and local initiatives; andStart Printed Page 12276
(e) develop and coordinate Departmental outreach efforts to disseminate information more effectively to faith-based and other community organizations with respect to programming changes, contracting opportunities, and other agency initiatives, including but not limited to Web and Internet resources.
Sec. 4.
Reporting Requirements.
(a) Report. Not later than 180 days from the date of this order and annually thereafter, the Center shall prepare and submit a report to the WHOFBCI Director.
(b) Contents. The report shall include a description of the Department's efforts in carrying out its responsibilities under this order, including but not limited to:
(i) a comprehensive analysis of the barriers to the full participation of faith-based and other community organizations in the delivery of social and community services identified pursuant to section 3(a) of this order and the proposed strategies to eliminate those barriers; and
(ii) a summary of the technical assistance and other information that will be available to faith-based and other community organizations regarding the program activities of the agency and the preparation of applications or proposals for grants, cooperative agreements, contracts, and procurement.
(c) Performance Indicators. The first report shall include annual performance indicators and measurable objectives for Departmental action. Each report filed thereafter shall measure the Department's performance against the objectives set forth in the initial report.
Sec. 5.
Responsibilities of the Secretary. The Secretary shall:
(a) designate an employee within the department to serve as the liaison and point of contact with the WHOFBCI Director; and
(b) cooperate with the WHOFBCI Director and provide such information, support, and assistance to the WHOFBCI Director as requested to implement this order.
Sec. 6.
General Provisions. (a) This order shall be implemented subject to the availability of appropriations and to the extent permitted by law.
(b) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 20519
Executive Order 13398 of April 18, 2006
National Mathematics Advisory Panel
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. To help keep America competitive, support American talent and creativity, encourage innovation throughout the American economy, and help State, local, territorial, and tribal governments give the Nation's children and youth the education they need to succeed, it shall be the policy of the United States to foster greater knowledge of and improved performance in mathematics among American students.
Sec. 2.
Establishment and Mission of Panel. (a) There is hereby established within the Department of Education (Department) the National Mathematics Advisory Panel (Panel).
(b) The Panel shall advise the President and the Secretary of Education (Secretary) consistent with this order on means to implement effectively the policy set forth in section 1, including with respect to the conduct, evaluation, and effective use of the results of research relating to proven-effective and evidence-based mathematics instruction.
Sec. 3.
Membership and Chair of Panel. (a) The Panel shall consist of no more than 30 members as follows:
(i) no more than 20 members from among individuals not employed by the Federal Government, appointed by the Secretary for such terms as the Secretary may specify at the time of appointment; and
(ii) no more than 10 members from among officers and employees of Federal agencies, designated by the Secretary after consultation with the heads of the agencies concerned.
(b) From among the members appointed under paragraph(3)(a)(i) of this order, the Secretary shall designate a Chair of the Panel.
(c) Subject to the direction of the Secretary, the Chair of the Panel shall convene and preside at meetings of the Panel, determine its agenda, direct its work and, as appropriate to deal with particular subject matters, establish and direct the work of subgroups of the Panel that shall consist exclusively of members of the Panel.
Sec. 4.
Report to the President on Strengthening Mathematics Education. In carrying out subsection 2(b) of this order, the Panel shall submit to the President, through the Secretary, a preliminary report not later than January 31, 2007, and a final report not later than February 28, 2008. Both reports shall, at a minimum, contain recommendations, based on the best available scientific evidence, on the following:
(a) the critical skills and skill progressions for students to acquire competence in algebra and readiness for higher levels of mathematics;
(b) the role and appropriate design of standards and assessment in promoting mathematical competence;
(c) the processes by which students of various abilities and backgrounds learn mathematics;
(d) instructional practices, programs, and materials that are effective for improving mathematics learning;Start Printed Page 20520
(e) the training, selection, placement, and professional development of teachers of mathematics in order to enhance students' learning of mathematics;
(f) the role and appropriate design of systems for delivering instruction in mathematics that combine the different elements of learning processes, curricula, instruction, teacher training and support, and standards, assessments, and accountability;
(g) needs for research in support of mathematics education;
(h) ideas for strengthening capabilities to teach children and youth basic mathematics, geometry, algebra, and calculus and other mathematical disciplines;
(i) such other matters relating to mathematics education as the Panel deems appropriate; and
(j) such other matters relating to mathematics education as the Secretary may require.
Sec. 5.
Additional Reports. The Secretary may require the Panel, in carrying out subsection 2(b) of this order, to submit such additional reports relating to the policy set forth in section 1 as the Secretary deems appropriate.
Sec. 6.
General Provisions. (a) This order shall be implemented in a manner consistent with applicable law, including section 103 of the Department of Education Organization Act (20 U.S.C. 3403), and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(b) The Department shall provide such administrative support and funding for the Panel as the Secretary determines appropriate. To the extent permitted by law, and where practicable, agencies shall, upon request by the Secretary, provide assistance to the Panel.
(c) The Panel shall obtain information and advice as appropriate in the course of its work from:
(i) officers or employees of Federal agencies, unless otherwise directed by the head of the agency concerned;
(ii) State, local, territorial, and tribal officials;
(iii) experts on matters relating to the policy set forth in section 1;
(iv) parents and teachers; and
(v) such other individuals as the Panel deems appropriate or as the Secretary may direct.
(d) Members of the Panel who are not officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation and may receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in Government service (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707), consistent with the availability of funds.
(e) Insofar as the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.) (the “Act”), may apply to the administration of any portion of this order, any functions of the President under that Act, except that of reporting to the Congress, shall be performed by the Secretary in accordance with the guidelines issued by the Administrator of General Services.
(f) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable by any party at law or in equity against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.Start Printed Page 20521
Sec. 7.
Termination. Unless hereafter extended by the President, this Advisory Panel shall terminate 2 years after the date of this order.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13399 of April 25, 2006
Blocking Property of Additional Persons in Connection With the National Emergency With Respect to Syria
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.), section 5 of the United Nations Participation Act, as amended (22 U.S.C. 287c) (UNPA), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code; and in view of United Nations Security Council Resolution (UNSCR) 1636 of October 31, 2005,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, determine that it is in the interests of the United States to (1) assist the international independent investigation Commission (the “Commission”) established pursuant to UNSCR 1595 of April 7, 2005, (2) assist the Government of Lebanon in identifying and holding accountable in accordance with applicable law those persons who were involved in planning, sponsoring, organizing, or perpetrating the terrorist act in Beirut, Lebanon, on February 14, 2005, that resulted in the assassination of former Prime Minister of Lebanon Rafiq Hariri, and the deaths of 22 others, and other bombings or assassination attempts in Lebanon since October 1, 2004, that are related to Hariri's assassination or that implicate the Government of Syria or its officers or agents, and (3) take note of the Commission's conclusions in its report of October 19, 2005, that there is converging evidence pointing to both Lebanese and Syrian involvement in terrorist acts, that interviewees tried to mislead the Commission's investigation by giving false or inaccurate statements, and that a senior official of Syria submitted false information to the Commission. In light of these determinations, and to take additional steps with respect to the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13338 of May 11, 2004, concerning certain actions of the Government of Syria, I hereby order:
Section 1. (a) Except to the extent that sections 203(b)(1), (3), and (4) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(1), (3) and (4)) may apply, or to the extent provided in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date of this order, all property and interests in property that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of any United States person, including any overseas branch, of the following persons are blocked and may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in: persons determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State,
(i) to be, or to have been, involved in the planning, sponsoring, organizing, or perpetrating of:
(A) the terrorist act in Beirut, Lebanon, that resulted in the assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri and the deaths of 22 others; or
(B) any other bombing, assassination, or assassination attempt in Lebanon since October 1, 2004, that is related to Hariri's assassination or that implicates the Government of Syria or its officers or agents;
(ii) to have obstructed or otherwise impeded the work of the Commission established pursuant to UNSCR 1595;Start Printed Page 25060
(iii) to have materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services in support of, any such terrorist act, bombing, or assassination attempt, or any person designated pursuant to this order; or
(iv) to be owned or controlled by, or acting or purporting to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any person designated pursuant to this order.
(b) I hereby determine that, to the extent section 203(b)(2) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)) may apply, the making of donations of the type of articles specified in such section by, to, or for the benefit of any person designated pursuant to this order would seriously impair my ability to deal with the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13338, and I hereby prohibit such donations as provided by paragraph (a) of this section.
(c) The prohibitions in paragraph (a) of this section include but are not limited to (i) the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any person designated pursuant to this order, and (ii) the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.
Sec. 2. (a) Any transaction by a United States person or within the United States that evades or avoids, has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
(b) Any conspiracy formed to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
Sec. 3. For the purposes of this order:
(a) the term “person” means an individual or entity;
(b) the term “entity” means a partnership, association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization; and
(c) the term “United States person” means any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States.
Sec. 4. For those persons designated pursuant to this order who might have a constitutional presence in the United States, I find that, because of the ability to transfer funds or other assets instantaneously, prior notice to such persons of measures to be taken pursuant to this order would render these measures ineffectual. I therefore determine that for these measures to be effective in addressing the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13338, there need be no prior notice of a determination made pursuant to section 1(a) of this order.
Sec. 5. The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA and UNPA, as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government, consistent with applicable law. All agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order and, where appropriate, to advise the Secretary of the Treasury in a timely manner of the measures taken.
Sec. 6. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right, benefit or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.Start Printed Page 25061
Sec. 7. This order is effective at 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time on April 26, 2006.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13400 of April 26, 2006
Blocking Property of Persons in Connection With the Conflict in Sudan's Darfur Region
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.)(IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.)(NEA), section 5 of the United Nations Participation Act, as amended (22 U.S.C. 287c)(UNPA), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, find that an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States is posed by the persistence of violence in Sudan's Darfur region, particularly against civilians and including sexual violence against women and girls, and by the deterioration of the security situation and its negative impact on humanitarian assistance efforts, as noted by the United Nations Security Council in Resolution 1591 of March 29, 2005, and, to deal with that threat, hereby expand the scope of the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13067 of November 3, 1997, with respect to the policies and actions of the Government of Sudan, and hereby order:
Section 1. (a) Except to the extent that sections 203(b) (1), (3), and (4) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(1), (3), and (4)) may apply, or to the extent provided in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date of this order, all property and interests in property of the following persons, that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of any United States person, including any overseas branch, are blocked and may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in:
(i) the persons listed in the Annex to this order; and
(ii) any person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State:
(A) to have constituted a threat to the peace process in Darfur;
(B) to have constituted a threat to stability in Darfur and the region;
(C) to be responsible for conduct related to the conflict in Darfur that violates international law;
(D) to be responsible for heinous conduct with respect to human life or limb related to the conflict in Darfur;
(E) to have directly or indirectly supplied, sold, or transferred arms or any related materiel, or any assistance, advice, or training related to military activities to:
(1) the Government of Sudan;
(2) the Sudan Liberation Movement/Army;
(3) the Justice and Equality Movement;
(4) the Janjaweed; or
(5) any person (other than a person listed in subparagraph (E)(1) through (E)(4) above) operating in the states of North Darfur, South Darfur, or West Darfur that is a belligerent, a nongovernmental entity, or an individual;Start Printed Page 25484
(F) to be responsible for offensive military overflights in and over the Darfur region;
(G) to have materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, materiel, or technological support for, or goods or services in support of, the activities described in paragraph (a)(ii)(A) through (F) of this section or any person listed in or designated pursuant to this order; or
(H) to be owned or controlled by, or acting or purporting to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any person listed in or designated pursuant to this order.
(b) I hereby determine that, to the extent section 203(b)(2) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)) may apply, the making of donations of the type of articles specified in such section by, to, or for the benefit of any person listed in or designated pursuant to this order would seriously impair my ability to deal with the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13067 and expanded in this order, and I hereby prohibit such donations as provided by paragraph (a) of this section.
(c) The prohibitions of paragraph (a) of this section include, but are not limited to, (i) the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any person listed in or designated pursuant to this order, and (ii) the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.
Sec. 2. (a) Any transaction by a United States person or within the United States that evades or avoids, has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
(b) Any conspiracy formed to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
Sec. 3. For the purposes of this order:
(a) the term “person” means an individual or entity;
(b) the term “entity” means a partnership, association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization;
(c) the term “United States person” means any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States; and
(d) the term “arms or any related materiel” means arms or related materiel of all types, military aircraft, and equipment, but excludes:
(i) supplies and technical assistance, including training, intended solely for use in authorized monitoring, verification, or peace support operations, including such operations led by regional organizations;
(ii) supplies of non-lethal military equipment intended solely for humanitarian use, human rights monitoring use, or protective use, and related technical assistance, including training;
(iii) supplies of protective clothing, including flak jackets and military helmets, for use by United Nations personnel, representatives of the media, and humanitarian and development workers and associated personnel, for their personal use only;
(iv) assistance and supplies provided in support of implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement signed January 9, 2005, by the Government of Sudan and the People's Liberation Movement/Army; and
(v) other movements of military equipment and supplies into the Darfur region by the United States or that are permitted by a rule or decision of the Secretary of State, after consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury.
Sec. 4. For those persons listed in or designated pursuant to this order who might have a constitutional presence in the United States, I find that because of the ability to transfer funds or other assets instantaneously, prior notice to such persons of measures to be taken pursuant to this order Start Printed Page 25485would render these measures ineffectual. I therefore determine that, for these measures to be effective in addressing the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13067 and expanded by this order, there need be no prior notice of a listing or determination made pursuant to section 1 of this order.
Sec. 5. The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA and UNPA as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government, consistent with applicable law. All agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order and, where appropriate, to advise the Secretary of the Treasury in a timely manner of the measures taken. The Secretary of the Treasury shall ensure compliance with those provisions of section 401 of the NEA (50 U.S.C. 1641) applicable to the Department of the Treasury in relation to this order.
Sec. 6. The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to submit the recurring and final reports to the Congress on the national emergency expanded by this order, consistent with section 401(c) of the NEA (50 U.S.C. 1641(c)) and section 204(c) of the IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1703(c)).
Sec. 7. The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to determine, subsequent to the issuance of this order, that circumstances no longer warrant the inclusion of a person in the Annex to this order and that the property and interests in property of that person are therefore no longer blocked pursuant to section 1 of this order.
Sec. 8. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right, benefit, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
Sec. 9. This order is effective at 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time on April 27, 2006.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
April 26, 2006.
Start Printed Page 25486
Start Printed Page 25737
Executive Order 13401 of April 27, 2006
Responsibilities of Federal Departments and Agencies With Respect to Volunteer Community Service
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America and in order to help ensure that the Federal Government supports and encourages volunteer community service, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Designation of a Liaison for Volunteer Community Service. (a) The head of each agency shall, within 20 days after the date of this order, designate an officer or employee of such agency compensated at a level at or above the minimum level of pay of a member of the Senior Executive Service to serve under the authority of the head of the agency as the agency liaison for volunteer community service (Liaison).
(b) The Liaison in each agency shall promote and support community service on a voluntary basis among Federal employees, including those approaching retirement; promote the use of skilled volunteers; and facilitate public recognition for volunteer community service.
(c) The head of each agency shall prescribe arrangements within the agency for support and supervision of the Liaison that ensure high priority and substantial visibility for the function of the Liaison within the agency under this order.
(d) Each executive agency shall provide its Liaison with appropriate administrative support and other resources to meet the responsibilities of the Liaison under this order.
Sec. 2.
Goals and Responsibilities of the Liaison. The Liaison shall foster within the Liaison's agency a culture of taking responsibility, service to others, and good citizenship. Toward that end, the Liaison shall:
(a) identify, catalog, and review all activities of the agency that relate to volunteer community service, including, but not limited to rules, orders, grant programs, external relations, and other policies and practices, and make such recommendations to the head of the agency for adjustments as may be appropriate;
(b) actively work with USA Freedom Corps to promote volunteer community service among agency employees by providing information about community service opportunities;
(c) coordinate within the agency actions to facilitate public recognition for volunteer community service;
(d) promote, expand, and enhance skilled volunteer community service opportunities;
(e) work with the USA Freedom Corps and the Director of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) to consider any appropriate changes in agency policies or practices that are not currently consistent with OPM guidance;
(f) coordinate the awarding of the President's Volunteer Service Award to recognize outstanding volunteer service by employees within the agency; and
(g) act as a liaison with the USA Freedom Corps.
Sec. 3.
Administrative Provisions. (a) The USA Freedom Corps shall provide such information with respect to volunteer community service programs Start Printed Page 25738and activities and such advice and assistance as may be required by agencies in performing their functions under this order.
(b) Executive Order 12820 of November 5, 1992, is revoked.
(c) This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(d) As used in this order:
(i) “agency” has the meaning of “executive agency” as defined in section 105 of title 5, United States Code; and
(ii) “USA Freedom Corps” means the Director of the USA Freedom Corps Office established by section 4 of Executive Order 13254 of January 29, 2002.
Sec. 4.
Reporting Provisions. (a) Not later than 180 days from the date of this order and annually thereafter, each agency Liaison shall prepare and submit a report to the USA Freedom Corps that includes a description of the agency's activities in performing its functions under this order.
(b) A Liaison's first report under subsection (a) shall include annual performance indicators and measurable objectives for agency action approved by the head of the agency. Each report filed thereafter under subsection (a) shall measure the agency's performance against the indicators and objectives approved by the head of the agency.
Sec. 5.
Judicial Review. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable by any party at law or in equity against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
April 27, 2006.
Executive Order 13402 of May 10, 2006
Strengthening Federal Efforts To Protect Against Identity Theft
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, in order to strengthen efforts to protect against identity theft, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. It is the policy of the United States to use Federal resources effectively to deter, prevent, detect, investigate, proceed against, and prosecute unlawful use by persons of the identifying information of other persons, including through:
(a) increased aggressive law enforcement actions designed to prevent, investigate, and prosecute identity theft crimes, recover the proceeds of such crimes, and ensure just and effective punishment of those who perpetrate identity theft;
(b) improved public outreach by the Federal Government to better (i) educate the public about identity theft and protective measures against identity theft, and (ii) address how the private sector can take appropriate steps to protect personal data and educate the public about identity theft; and
(c) increased safeguards that Federal departments, agencies, and instrumentalities can implement to better secure government-held personal data.
Sec. 2.
Establishment of the Identity Theft Task Force.
(a) There is hereby established the Identity Theft Task Force.
(b) The Task Force shall consist exclusively of:
(i) the Attorney General, who shall serve as Chairman of the Task Force;
(ii) the Chairman of the Federal Trade Commission, who shall serve as Co-Chairman of the Task Force;
(iii) the Secretary of the Treasury;
(iv) the Secretary of Commerce;
(v) the Secretary of Health and Human Services;
(vi) the Secretary of Veterans Affairs;
(vii) the Secretary of Homeland Security;
(viii) the Director of the Office of Management and Budget;
(ix) the Commissioner of Social Security;
(x) the following officers of the United States:
(A) the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System;
(B) the Chairperson of the Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation;
(C) the Comptroller of the Currency;
(D) the Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision;
(E) the Chairman of the National Credit Union Administration Board; and
(F) the Postmaster General; and
(xi) such other officers of the United States as the Attorney General may designate from time to time, with the concurrence of the respective heads of departments and agencies concerned.Start Printed Page 27946
(c) The Chairman and Co-Chairman shall convene and preside at the meetings of the Task Force, determine its agenda, direct its work and, as appropriate, establish and direct subgroups of the Task Force that shall consist exclusively of members of the Task Force. Such subgroups may address particular subject matters, such as criminal law enforcement or private sector education and outreach. The Chairman and Co-Chairman may also designate, with the concurrence of the head of department, agency, or instrumentality of which the official is part, such other Federal officials as they deem appropriate for participation in the Task Force subgroups.
(d) A member of the Task Force, including the Chairman and Co-Chairman, may designate, to perform the Task Force or Task Force subgroup functions of the member, any person who is a part of the member's department, agency, or instrumentality and who has high-level policy or operational duties or responsibilities related to the mission of the Task Force.
Sec. 3.
Functions of the Task Force. The Task Force, in implementing the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, shall:
(a) review the activities of executive branch departments, agencies, and instrumentalities relating to the policy set forth in section 1, and building upon these prior activities, prepare and submit in writing to the President within 180 days after the date of this order a coordinated strategic plan to further improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the Federal Government's activities in the areas of identity theft awareness, prevention, detection, and prosecution;
(b) coordinate, as appropriate and subject to section 5(a) of this order, Federal Government efforts related to implementation of the policy set forth in section 1 of this order;
(c) obtain information and advice relating to the policy set forth in section 1 from representatives of State, local, and tribal governments, private sector entities, and individuals, in a manner that seeks their individual advice and does not involve collective judgment or consensus advice and deliberation and without giving any such person a vote or a veto over the activities or advice of the Task Force;
(d) promote enhanced cooperation by Federal departments and agencies with State and local authorities responsible for the prevention, investigation, and prosecution of significant identity theft crimes, including through avoiding unnecessary duplication of effort and expenditure of resources; and
(e) provide advice on the establishment, execution, and efficiency of policies and activities to implement the policy set forth in section 1:
(i) to the President in written reports from time to time, including recommendations for administrative action or proposals for legislation; and
(ii) to the heads of departments, agencies, and instrumentalities as appropriate from time to time within the discretion of the Chairman and the Co-Chairman.
Sec. 4.
Cooperation. (a) To the extent permitted by law and applicable presidential guidance, executive departments, agencies, and instrumentalities shall provide to the Task Force such information, support, and assistance as the Task Force, through its Chairman and Co-Chairman, may request to implement this order.
(b) The Task Force shall be located in the Department of Justice for administrative purposes, and to the extent permitted by law, the Department of Justice shall provide the funding and administrative support the Task Force needs to implement this order, as determined by the Attorney General.
Sec. 5.
General Provisions. (a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(i) authority granted by law to an executive department, agency, or instrumentality or the head thereof; andStart Printed Page 27947
(ii) functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(b) This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(c) This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
Sec. 6.
Termination. Unless the Task Force is sooner terminated by the President, the Attorney General may terminate the Task Force by a written notice of its termination published in the Federal Register.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 28543
Executive Order 13403 of May 12, 2006
Amendments to Executive Orders 11030, 13279, 13339, 13381, and 13389, and Revocation of Executive Order 13011
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Executive Order 11030 of June 19, 1962, as amended, is further amended;
(a) in subsection 1(f):
(i) by striking “typewritten” and inserting “prepared”
(ii) by striking “8 x 13” and inserting “8.5 x 14” and
(iii) by striking “1 1/2” and inserting “1”
(b) in subsection 2(a), by striking “, with seven copies thereof,”
(c) by striking subsections 2(c) and 2 (d) and relettering subsection “2(e)” as “2(c)”;
(d) in section 5, by striking “Section 12 of the Federal Register Act” and inserting in lieu thereof “section 1511 of title 44, United States Code” and
(e) in section 6, by striking “Section 5(a) of the Federal Register Act” and inserting in lieu thereof “subsection 1505(a) of title 44, United States Code”.
Sec. 2.
Section 1(e) of Executive Order 13279 of December 12, 2002, is amended to read as follows: “(e) 'Specified agency heads' mean the Attorney General, the Secretaries of Agriculture, Commerce, Education, Health and Human Services, Homeland Security, Housing and Urban Development, Labor, and Veterans Affairs, the Administrators of the Agency for International Development and the Small Business Administration, and the head of any other department or agency in the executive branch in which the President creates a Center for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives.”
Sec. 3.
Section 9 of Executive Order 13339 of May 13, 2004, is amended by deleting “2 years from the date of this order, unless renewed by the President” and inserting in lieu thereof “May 13, 2007, unless extended beyond that date by the President”.
Sec. 4.
Section 6(b) of Executive Order 13381 of June 27, 2005, is amended by striking “Unless extended by the President, this order shall expire” and inserting in lieu thereof “The provisions of this order (other than subsection 5(b) and the amendment made thereby) shall, unless extended by the President, expire”.
Sec. 5.
Section 3 of Executive Order 13389 of November 1, 2005, is amended:
(a) by inserting “and” after the semicolon at the end of subsection (a);
(b) by striking “; and” at the end of subsection 3(b) and inserting a period in lieu thereof; and
(c) by striking subsection (c).
Sec. 6.
Executive Order 13011 of July 16, 1996 (Federal Information Technology), is revoked.
Sec. 7.
This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any Start Printed Page 28544party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13404 of June 7, 2006
Task Force on New Americans
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to strengthen the efforts of the Department of Homeland Security and Federal, State, and local agencies to help legal immigrants embrace the common core of American civic culture, learn our common language, and fully become Americans, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment. The Secretary of Homeland Security (Secretary) shall immediately establish within the Department of Homeland Security (Department) a Task Force on New Americans (Task Force).
Sec. 2.
Membership and Operation. (a) The Task Force shall be limited to the following members or employees designated by them at no lower than the Assistant Secretary level or its equivalent:
(i) the Secretary of Homeland Security, who shall serve as Chair;
(ii) the Secretary of State;
(iii) the Secretary of the Treasury;
(iv) the Secretary of Defense;
(v) the Attorney General;
(vi) the Secretary of Agriculture;
(vii) the Secretary of Commerce;
(viii) the Secretary of Labor;
(ix) the Secretary of Health and Human Services;
(x) the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development;
(xi) the Secretary of Education;
(xii) such other officers or employees of the Department of Homeland Security as the Secretary may from time to time designate; and
(xiii) such other officers of the United States as the Secretary may designate from time to time, with the concurrence of the respective heads of departments and agencies concerned.
(b) The Secretary shall convene and preside at meetings of the Task Force, direct its work, and as appropriate, establish and direct subgroups of the Task Force that shall consist exclusively of Task Force members. The Secretary shall designate an official of the Department to serve as the Executive Secretary of the Task Force, and the Executive Secretary shall head the staff assigned to the Task Force.
Sec. 3.
Functions. Consistent with applicable law, the Task Force shall:
(a) provide direction to executive departments and agencies (agencies) concerning the integration into American society of America's legal immigrants, particularly through instruction in English, civics, and history;
(b) promote public-private partnerships that will encourage businesses to offer English and civics education to workers;
(c) identify ways to expand English and civics instruction for legal immigrants, including through faith-based, community, and other groups, and ways to promote volunteer community service; andStart Printed Page 33594
(d) make recommendations to the President, through the Secretary, from time to time regarding:
(i) actions to enhance cooperation among agencies on the integration of legal immigrants into American society;
(ii) actions to enhance cooperation among Federal, State, and local authorities responsible for the integration of legal immigrants;
(iii) changes in rules, regulations, or policy to improve the effective integration of legal immigrants into American society; and
(iv) proposed legislation relating to the integration of legal immigrants into American society.
Sec. 4.
Administration. (a) To the extent permitted by law, the Department shall provide the funding and administrative support the Task Force needs to implement this order, as determined by the Secretary.
(b) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(i) authority granted by law to an agency or the head thereof; or
(ii) functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(c) This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(d) This order is intended to improve the internal management of the Federal Government. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, instrumentalities, officers, employees, agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13405 of June 16, 2006
Blocking Property of Certain Persons Undermining Democratic Processes or Institutions in Belarus
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.)(IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.)(NEA), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, determine that the actions and policies of certain members of the Government of Belarus and other persons to undermine Belarus' democratic processes or institutions, manifested most recently in the fundamentally undemocratic March 2006 elections, to commit human rights abuses related to political repression, including detentions and disappearances, and to engage in public corruption, including by diverting or misusing Belarusian public assets or by misusing public authority, constitute an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States, hereby declare a national emergency to deal with that threat, and hereby order:
Section 1. (a) Except to the extent provided in section 203(b)(1), (3), and (4) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(1), (3), and (4)), or in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date of this order, all property and interests in property that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of any United States person, including any overseas branch, of the following persons are blocked and may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in:
(i) the persons listed in the Annex to this order; and
(ii) any person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State:
(A) to be responsible for, or to have participated in, actions or policies that undermine democratic processes or institutions in Belarus;
(B) to be responsible for, or to have participated in, human rights abuses related to political repression in Belarus;
(C) to be a senior-level official, a family member of such an official, or a person closely linked to such an official who is responsible for or has engaged in public corruption related to Belarus;
(D) to have materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services in support of, the activities described in paragraphs (a)(ii)(A) through (C) of this section or any person listed in or designated pursuant to this order; or
(E) to be owned or controlled by, or acting or purporting to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any person listed in or designated pursuant to this order.
(b) I hereby determine that the making of donations of the type of articles specified in section 203(b)(2) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)) by, to, or for the benefit of any person listed in or designated pursuant to this order would seriously impair my ability to deal with the national emergency declared in this order, and I hereby prohibit such donations as provided by paragraph (a) of this section.Start Printed Page 35486
(c) The prohibitions in paragraph (a) of this section include, but are not limited to, (i) the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any person listed in or designated pursuant to this order, and (ii) the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.
Sec. 2. (a) Any transaction by a United States person or within the United States that evades or avoids, has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
(b) Any conspiracy formed to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
Sec. 3. For purposes of this order:
(a) the term “person” means an individual or entity;
(b) the term “entity” means a partnership, association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization;
(c) the term “United States person” means any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States.
Sec. 4. For those persons listed in or designated pursuant to this order who might have a constitutional presence in the United States, I find that because of the ability to transfer funds or other assets instantaneously, prior notice to such persons of measures to be taken pursuant to this order would render these measures ineffectual. I therefore determine that for these measures to be effective in addressing the national emergency declared in this order, there need be no prior notice of a listing or determination made pursuant to section 1 of this order.
Sec. 5. The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA, as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government, consistent with applicable law. All executive agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order and, where appropriate, to advise the Secretary of the Treasury in a timely manner of the measures taken. The Secretary of the Treasury shall ensure compliance with those provisions of section 401 of the NEA (50 U.S.C. 1641) applicable to the Department of the Treasury in relation to this order.
Sec. 6. The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to submit the recurring and final reports to the Congress on the national emergency declared in this order, consistent with section 401(c) of the NEA (50 U.S.C. 1641(c)) and section 204(c) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1703(c)).
Sec. 7. The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to determine, subsequent to the issuance of this order, that circumstances no longer warrant the inclusion of a person in the Annex to this order and that the property and interests in property of that person are therefore no longer blocked pursuant to section 1 of this order.
Sec. 8. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right, benefit, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.Start Printed Page 35487
Sec. 9. This order is effective at 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time on June 19, 2006.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
June 16 2006.
Executive Order 13406 of June 23, 2006
Protecting the Property Rights of the American People
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to strengthen the rights of the American people against the taking of their private property, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. It is the policy of the United States to protect the rights of Americans to their private property, including by limiting the taking of private property by the Federal Government to situations in which the taking is for public use, with just compensation, and for the purpose of benefiting the general public and not merely for the purpose of advancing the economic interest of private parties to be given ownership or use of the property taken.
Sec. 2.
Implementation. (a) The Attorney General shall:
(i) issue instructions to the heads of departments and agencies to implement the policy set forth in section 1 of this order; and
(ii) monitor takings by departments and agencies for compliance with the policy set forth in section 1 of this order.
(b) Heads of departments and agencies shall, to the extent permitted by law:
(i) comply with instructions issued under subsection (a)(i); and
(ii) provide to the Attorney General such information as the Attorney General determines necessary to carry out subsection (a)(ii).
Sec. 3.
Specific Exclusions. Nothing in this order shall be construed to prohibit a taking of private property by the Federal Government, that otherwise complies with applicable law, for the purpose of:
(a) public ownership or exclusive use of the property by the public, such as for a public medical facility, roadway, park, forest, governmental office building, or military reservation;
(b) projects designated for public, common carrier, public transportation, or public utility use, including those for which a fee is assessed, that serve the general public and are subject to regulation by a governmental entity;
(c) conveying the property to a nongovernmental entity, such as a telecommunications or transportation common carrier, that makes the property available for use by the general public as of right;
(d) preventing or mitigating a harmful use of land that constitutes a threat to public health, safety, or the environment;
(e) acquiring abandoned property;
(f) quieting title to real property;
(g) acquiring ownership or use by a public utility;
(h) facilitating the disposal or exchange of Federal property; or
(i) meeting military, law enforcement, public safety, public transportation, or public health emergencies.
Sec. 4.
General Provisions. (a) This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(b) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:Start Printed Page 36974
(i) authority granted by law to a department or agency or the head thereof; or
(ii) functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(c) This order shall be implemented in a manner consistent with Executive Order 12630 of March 15, 1988.
(d) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 36975
Executive Order 13407 of June 26, 2006
Public Alert and Warning System
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5121 et seq.), and the Homeland Security Act of 2002, as amended (6 U.S.C. 101 et seq.), it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. It is the policy of the United States to have an effective, reliable, integrated, flexible, and comprehensive system to alert and warn the American people in situations of war, terrorist attack, natural disaster, or other hazards to public safety and well-being (public alert and warning system), taking appropriate account of the functions, capabilities, and needs of the private sector and of all levels of government in our Federal system, and to ensure that under all conditions the President can communicate with the American people.
Sec. 2.
Functions of the Secretary of Homeland Security.
(a) To implement the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall:
(i) inventory, evaluate, and assess the capabilities and integration with the public alert and warning system of Federal, State, territorial, tribal, and local public alert and warning resources;
(ii) establish or adopt, as appropriate, common alerting and warning protocols, standards, terminology, and operating procedures for the public alert and warning system to enable interoperability and the secure delivery of coordinated messages to the American people through as many communication pathways as practicable, taking account of Federal Communications Commission rules as provided by law;
(iii) ensure the capability to adapt the distribution and content of communications on the basis of geographic location, risks, or personal user preferences, as appropriate;
(iv) include in the public alert and warning system the capability to alert and warn all Americans, including those with disabilities and those without an understanding of the English language;
(v) through cooperation with the owners and operators of communication facilities, maintain, protect, and, if necessary, restore communications facilities and capabilities necessary for the public alert and warning system;
(vi) ensure the conduct of training, tests, and exercises for the public alert and warning system;
(vii) ensure the conduct of public education efforts so that State, territorial, tribal, and local governments, the private sector, and the American people understand the functions of the public alert and warning system and how to access, use, and respond to information from the public alert and warning system;
(viii) consult, coordinate, and cooperate with the private sector, including communications media organizations, and Federal, State, territorial, tribal, and local governmental authorities, including emergency response providers, as appropriate;Start Printed Page 36976
(ix) administer the Emergency Alert System (EAS) as a critical component of the public alert and warning system; and
(x) ensure that under all conditions the President of the United States can alert and warn the American people.
(b) In performing the functions set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall coordinate with the Secretary of Commerce, the heads of other departments and agencies of the executive branch (agencies), and other officers of the United States, as appropriate, and the Federal Communications Commission.
(c) The Secretary of Homeland Security may issue guidance to implement this order.
Sec. 3.
Duties of Heads of Departments and Agencies.
(a) The heads of agencies shall provide such assistance and information as the Secretary of Homeland Security may request to implement this order.
(b) In addition to performing the duties specified under subsection (a) of this section:
(i) the Secretary of Commerce shall make available to the Secretary of Homeland Security, to assist in implementing this order, the capabilities and expertise of the Department of Commerce relating to standards, technology, telecommunications, dissemination systems, and weather;
(ii) the Secretary of Defense shall provide to the Secretary of Homeland Security requirements for the public alert and warning system necessary to ensure proper coordination of the functions of the Department of Defense with the use of such system;
(iii) the Federal Communications Commission shall, as provided by law, adopt rules to ensure that communications systems have the capacity to transmit alerts and warnings to the public as part of the public alert and warning system; and
(iv) the heads of agencies with capabilities for public alert and warning shall comply with guidance issued by the Secretary of Homeland Security under subsection 2(c) of this order, and shall develop and maintain such capabilities in a manner consistent and interoperable with the public alert and warning system.
Sec. 4.
Reports on Implementation. Not later than 90 days after the date of this order, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall submit to the President, through the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and Counterterrorism, a plan for the implementation of this order, and shall thereafter submit reports from time to time, and not less often than once each year, on such implementation, together with any recommendations the Secretary finds appropriate.
Sec. 5.
Amendment, Revocation, and Transition.
(a) Section 3(b)(4) of Executive Order 12472 of April 3, 1984, as amended, is further amended by striking “Emergency Broadcast System” and inserting in lieu thereof “Emergency Alert System”.
(b) Not later than 120 days after the date of this order, the Secretary of Homeland Security, after consultation with the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and Counterterrorism, shall issue guidance under section 2(c) of this order that shall address the subject matter of the presidential memorandum of September 15, 1995, for the Director, Federal Emergency Management Agency, on Presidential Communications with the General Public During Periods of National Emergency, and upon issuance of such guidance such memorandum is revoked.
(c) The Secretary of Homeland Security shall ensure an orderly and effective transition, without loss of capability, from alert and warning systems available as of the date of this order to the public alert and warning system for which this order provides.Start Printed Page 36977
Sec. 6.
General Provisions. (a) This order shall be implemented in a manner consistent with:
(i) applicable law and presidential guidance, including Executive Order 12472 of April 3, 1984, as amended, and subject to the availability of appropriations; and
(ii) the authorities of agencies, or heads of agencies, vested by law.
(b) This order shall not be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, and legislative proposals.
(c) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any rights or benefits, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13408 of June 29, 2006
Amending Executive Order 13381, As Amended, To Extend its Duration by One Year
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to extend by 1 year the duration of Executive Order 13381 of June 27, 2005, it is hereby ordered that:
Section 1. Section 6(a) of Executive Order 13381 is amended by striking “April 1, 2006” and inserting in lieu thereof “April 1, 2007”.
Sec. 2. Section 6(b) of Executive Order 13381 is amended by striking “July 1, 2006” and inserting in lieu thereof “July 1, 2007”.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13409 of July 3, 2006
Establishing an Emergency Board To Investigate a Dispute Between Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority and Its Locomotive Engineers Represented by the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers and Trainmen
A dispute exists between Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority (SEPTA) and its employees represented by the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers and Trainmen (BLET).
The dispute has not heretofore been adjusted under the provisions of the Railway Labor Act, as amended, 45 U.S.C. 151-188 (RLA).
A party empowered by the RLA has requested that the President establish an emergency board pursuant to section 9A of the RLA (45 U.S.C. 159a).
Section 9A(c) of the RLA provides that the President, upon such request, shall appoint an emergency board to investigate and report on the dispute.
NOW, THEREFORE, by the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, including section 9A of the RLA, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment of Emergency Board (Board). There is established, effective 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time on July 8, 2006, a Board of three members to be appointed by the President to investigate and report on this dispute. No member shall be pecuniarily or otherwise interested in any organization of railroad employees or any carrier. The Board shall perform its functions subject to the availability of funds.
Sec. 2.
Report. The Board shall report to the President with respect to this dispute within 30 days of its creation.
Sec. 3.
Maintaining Conditions. As provided by section 9A(c) of the RLA, from the date of the creation of the Board and for 120 days thereafter, no change in the conditions out of which the dispute arose shall be made by the parties to the controversy, except by agreement of the parties.
Sec. 4.
Records Maintenance. The records and files of the Board are records of the Office of the President and upon the Board's termination shall be maintained in the physical custody of the National Mediation Board.Start Printed Page 38512
Sec. 5.
Expiration. The Board shall terminate upon the submission of the report provided for in section 2 of this order.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13410 of August 22, 2006
Promoting Quality and Efficient Health Care in Federal Government Administered or Sponsored Health Care Programs
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, and in order to promote federally led efforts to implement more transparent and high-quality health care, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Purpose. It is the purpose of this order to ensure that health care programs administered or sponsored by the Federal Government promote quality and efficient delivery of health care through the use of health information technology, transparency regarding health care quality and price, and better incentives for program beneficiaries, enrollees, and providers. It is the further purpose of this order to make relevant information available to these beneficiaries, enrollees, and providers in a readily useable manner and in collaboration with similar initiatives in the private sector and non-Federal public sector. Consistent with the purpose of improving the quality and efficiency of health care, the actions and steps taken by Federal Government agencies should not incur additional costs for the Federal Government.
Sec. 2.
Definitions. For purposes of this order:
(a) “Agency” means an agency of the Federal Government that administers or sponsors a Federal health care program.
(b) “Federal health care program” means the Federal Employees Health Benefit Program, the Medicare program, programs operated directly by the Indian Health Service, the TRICARE program for the Department of Defense and other uniformed services, and the health care program operated by the Department of Veterans Affairs. For purposes of this order, “Federal health care program” does not include State operated or funded federally subsidized programs such as Medicaid, the State Children's Health Insurance Program, or services provided to Department of Veterans' Affairs beneficiaries under 38 U.S.C. 1703.
(c) “Interoperability” means the ability to communicate and exchange data accurately, effectively, securely, and consistently with different information technology systems, software applications, and networks in various settings, and exchange data such that clinical or operational purpose and meaning of the data are preserved and unaltered.
(d) “Recognized interoperability standards” means interoperability standards recognized by the Secretary of Health and Human Services (the “Secretary”), in accordance with guidance developed by the Secretary, as existing on the date of the implementation, acquisition, or upgrade of health information technology systems under subsections (1) or (2) of section 3(a) of this order.
Sec. 3.
Directives for Agencies. Agencies shall perform the following functions:
(a) Health Information Technology.
(1) For Federal Agencies. As each agency implements, acquires, or upgrades health information technology systems used for the direct exchange of health information between agencies and with non-Federal entities, it shall utilize, where available, health information technology systems and products that meet recognized interoperability standards. Start Printed Page 51090
(2) For Contracting Purposes. Each agency shall require in contracts or agreements with health care providers, health plans, or health insurance issuers that as each provider, plan, or issuer implements, acquires, or upgrades health information technology systems, it shall utilize, where available, health information technology systems and products that meet recognized interoperability standards.
(b) Transparency of Quality Measurements.
(1) In General. Each agency shall implement programs measuring the quality of services supplied by health care providers to the beneficiaries or enrollees of a Federal health care program. Such programs shall be based upon standards established by multi-stakeholder entities identified by the Secretary or by another agency subject to this order. Each agency shall develop its quality measurements in collaboration with similar initiatives in the private and non-Federal public sectors.
(2) Facilitation. An agency satisfies the requirements of this subsection if it participates in the aggregation of claims and other appropriate data for the purposes of quality measurement. Such aggregation shall be based upon standards established by multi-stakeholder entities identified by the Secretary or by another agency subject to this order.
(c) Transparency of Pricing Information. Each agency shall make available (or provide for the availability) to the beneficiaries or enrollees of a Federal health care program (and, at the option of the agency, to the public) the prices that it, its health insurance issuers, or its health insurance plans pay for procedures to providers in the health care program with which the agency, issuer, or plan contracts. Each agency shall also, in collaboration with multi-stakeholder groups such as those described in subsection (b)(1), participate in the development of information regarding the overall costs of services for common episodes of care and the treatment of common chronic diseases.
(d) Promoting Quality and Efficiency of Care. Each agency shall develop and identify, for beneficiaries, enrollees, and providers, approaches that encourage and facilitate the provision and receipt of high-quality and efficient health care. Such approaches may include pay-for-performance models of reimbursement consistent with current law. An agency will satisfy the requirements of this subsection if it makes available to beneficiaries or enrollees consumer-directed health care insurance products.
Sec. 4.
Implementation Date. Agencies shall comply with the requirements of this order by January 1, 2007.
Sec. 5.
Administration and Judicial Review.
(a) This order does not assume or rely upon additional Federal resources or spending to promote quality and efficient health care. Further, the actions directed by this order shall be carried out subject to the availability of appropriations and to the maximum extent permitted by law.
(b) This order shall be implemented in new contracts or new contract cycles as they may be renewed from time to time. Renegotiation outside of the normal contract cycle processes should be avoided.
(c) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity against the United Start Printed Page 51091States, its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13411 of August 29, 2006
Improving Assistance for Disaster Victims
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5121 et seq.) (the “Stafford Act”), and to take further actions to improve the delivery of Federal disaster assistance, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. It is the policy of the Federal Government to ensure that individuals who are victims of a terrorist attack, natural disaster, or other incident that is the subject of an emergency or major disaster declaration under the Stafford Act, and who are thereby eligible for financial or other assistance delivered by any department or agency of the executive branch (Federal disaster assistance), have prompt and efficient access to Federal disaster assistance, as well as information regarding assistance available from State and local government and private sector sources.
Sec. 2.
Task Force on Disaster Assistance Coordination. (a) Plan to Improve Delivery of Federal Disaster Assistance. To further the policy in section 1 of this order, there is established the interagency “Task Force on Disaster Assistance Coordination” (Task Force). The Task Force shall develop a plan to streamline and otherwise improve the delivery of Federal disaster assistance (Plan). The Plan shall:
(i) include an inventory of Federal disaster assistance programs and assess the effectiveness of their respective delivery mechanisms;
(ii) recommend specific actions to improve the delivery of Federal disaster assistance, which shall include actions to provide a centralized application process for Federal disaster assistance, provide a centralized and continuously updated clearinghouse from which disaster victims may obtain information regarding Federal disaster assistance and State and local government and private sector sources of disaster assistance, reduce unnecessarily duplicative application forms and processes for Federal disaster assistance, and strengthen controls designed to prevent improper payments and other forms of fraud, waste, and abuse; and
(iii) include an implementation schedule for the Plan's recommendations that provides for the phased implementation of the Plan by December 31, 2008, including quarterly milestones and metrics to be used to measure and evaluate implementation.
(b) Membership of the Task Force. (i) The Task Force shall consist exclusively of the following members, or their designees who shall be at the Assistant Secretary level (or its equivalent) or higher:
(A) the Secretary of Homeland Security, who shall serve as Chair;
(B) the Secretary of the Treasury;
(C) the Secretary of Defense;
(D) the Attorney General;
(E) the Secretary of Agriculture;
(F) the Secretary of Commerce;
(G) the Secretary of Labor;
(H) the Secretary of Health and Human Services;
(I) the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development; Start Printed Page 52730
(J) the Secretary of Education;
(K) the Secretary of Veterans Affairs;
(L) the Director of the Office of Personnel Management;
(M) the Commissioner of Social Security;
(N) the Administrator of the Small Business Administration;
(O) the Director of the Office of Management and Budget; and
(P) such other officers of the United States as the Secretary of Homeland Security may designate from time to time.
(ii) The Secretary of Homeland Security, or the Secretary's designee, shall convene and preside at meetings of the Task Force, determine its agenda, direct its work, and, as appropriate to address specific subject matters, establish and direct subgroups of the Task Force. A member of the Task Force may designate, to perform Task Force subgroup functions of the member, any person who is part of such member's department or agency and who is either an officer of the United States appointed by the President or a member of the Senior Executive Service.
(c) Plan Approval and Implementation. Not later than March 1, 2007, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall submit the Plan to the President for approval through the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and Counterterrorism and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget. Upon approval of the Plan by the President, the Secretary of Homeland Security, assisted by the Task Force, shall coordinate the implementation of the Plan. Until the completion of such implementation, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall submit a quarterly progress report to the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and Counterterrorism and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget.
Sec. 3.
Assistance and Support. To the extent permitted by law, the heads of all executive departments and agencies shall provide such assistance and information as the Secretary of Homeland Security may request in carrying out the Secretary's responsibilities under this order. Consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations, the Department of Homeland Security shall provide necessary funding and administrative support for the Task Force.
Sec. 4.
Administration. This order shall: (a) be implemented in a manner consistent with applicable laws, including Federal laws protecting the information privacy rights and other legal rights of Americans, and subject to the availability of appropriations;
(b) be implemented in a manner consistent with the statutory authority of the principal officers of executive departments and agencies as heads of their respective departments or agencies; and
(c) not be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, regulatory, and legislative responsibilities.
Sec. 5.
Judicial Review. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and is not intended to, and does not, create any rights or benefits, substantive or procedural, enforceable Start Printed Page 52731at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
B
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13412 of October 13, 2006
Blocking Property of and Prohibiting Transactions With the Government of Sudan
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.)(IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.)(NEA), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and taking appropriate account of the Darfur Peace and Accountability Act of 2006 (the “Act”),
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, find that, due to the continuation of the threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States created by certain policies and actions of the Government of Sudan that violate human rights, in particular with respect to the conflict in Darfur, where the Government of Sudan exercises administrative and legal authority and pervasive practical influence, and due to the threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States posed by the pervasive role played by the Government of Sudan in the petroleum and petrochemical industries in Sudan, it is in the interests of the United States to take additional steps with respect to the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13067 of November 3, 1997. Accordingly, I hereby order:
Section 1. Except to the extent provided in section 203(b) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)) or in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, all property and interests in property of the Government of Sudan that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of United States persons, including their overseas branches, are blocked and may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in.
Sec. 2. Except to the extent provided in section 203(b) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)) or in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date of this order, all transactions by United States persons relating to the petroleum or petrochemical industries in Sudan, including, but not limited to, oilfield services and oil or gas pipelines, are prohibited.
Sec. 3. (a) Any transaction by a United States person or within the United States that evades or avoids, has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
(b) Any conspiracy formed to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
Sec. 4. (a) Subject to paragraph (b) of this section, restrictions imposed by this order shall be in addition to, and do not derogate from, restrictions imposed in and under Executive Order 13067.
(b)(i) None of the prohibitions in section 2 of Executive Order 13067 shall apply to activities or related transactions with respect to Southern Sudan, Southern Kordofan/Nuba Mountains State, Blue Nile State, Abyei, Darfur, or marginalized areas in and around Khartoum, provided that the activities or transactions do not involve any property or interests in property of the Government of Sudan. Start Printed Page 61370
(ii) The Secretary of State, after consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, may define the term “Southern Sudan, Southern Kordofan/Nuba Mountains State, Blue Nile State, Abyei, Darfur, or marginalized areas in and around Khartoum” for the purposes of this order.
(c) The function of the President under subsection 6(c)(1) of the Comprehensive Peace in Sudan Act of 2004 (Public Law 108-497), as amended by section 5(a)(3) of the Act, is assigned to the Secretary of the Treasury as appropriate in the performance of such function.
(d) The functions of the President under subsection 6(c)(2) and the last sentence of 6(d) of the Comprehensive Peace in Sudan Act of 2004 (Public Law 108-497), as amended by subsections 5(a)(3) and (b), respectively, of the Act, are assigned to the Secretary of State, except that the function of denial of entry is assigned to the Secretary of Homeland Security.
(e) The functions of the President under sections 7 and 8 of the Act are assigned to the Secretary of State.
Sec. 5. Nothing in this order shall prohibit:
(a) transactions for the conduct of the official business of the Federal Government or the United Nations by employees thereof; or
(b) transactions in Sudan for journalistic activity by persons regularly employed in such capacity by a news-gathering organization.
Sec. 6. For the purposes of this order:
(a) the term “person” means an individual or entity;
(b) the term “entity” means a partnership, association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization;
(c) the term “United States person” means any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States; and
(d) the term “Government of Sudan” includes the Government of Sudan, its agencies, instrumentalities, and controlled entities, and the Central Bank of Sudan, but does not include the regional government of Southern Sudan.
Sec. 7. For those persons whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to section 1 of this order who might have a constitutional presence in the United States, I find that, because of the ability to transfer funds or other assets instantaneously, prior notice to such persons of measures to be taken pursuant to this order would render these measures ineffectual. I therefore determine that for these measures to be effective in addressing the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13067 there need be no prior notice of a determination made pursuant to section 1 of this order.
Sec. 8. The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government, consistent with applicable law. All executive agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order and, where appropriate, to advise the Secretary of the Treasury in a timely manner of the measures taken. The Secretary of the Treasury shall ensure compliance with those provisions of section 401 of the NEA (50 U.S.C. 1641) applicable to the Department of the Treasury in relation to this order.
Sec. 9. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right, benefit, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person. Start Printed Page 61371
Sec. 10. This order shall take effect upon the enactment of the Darfur Peace and Accountability Act of 2006.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13413 of October 27, 2006
Blocking Property of Certain Persons Contributing to the Conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) (NEA), section 5 of the United Nations Participation Act, as amended (22 U.S.C. 287c) (UNPA), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, determine that the situation in or in relation to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which has been marked by widespread violence and atrocities that continue to threaten regional stability and was addressed by the United Nations Security Council in Resolution 1596 of April 18, 2005, Resolution 1649 of December 21, 2005, and Resolution 1698 of July 31, 2006, constitutes an unusual and extraordinary threat to the foreign policy of the United States and hereby declare a national emergency to deal with that threat. To address that threat, I hereby order:
Section 1. (a) Except to the extent that section 203(b)(1), (3), and (4) of the IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(1), (3), and (4)) may apply, or to the extent provided in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date of this order, all property and interests in property that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of United States persons, including their overseas branches, of the following persons are blocked and may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in:
(i) the persons listed in the Annex to this order; and
(ii) any person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State:
(A) to be a political or military leader of a foreign armed group operating in the Democratic Republic of the Congo that impedes the disarmament, repatriation, or resettlement of combatants;
(B) to be a political or military leader of a Congolese armed group that impedes the disarmament, demobilization, or reintegration of combatants;
(C) to be a political or military leader recruiting or using children in armed conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in violation of applicable international law;
(D) to have committed serious violations of international law involving the targeting of children in situations of armed conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including killing and maiming, sexual violence, abduction, and forced displacement;
(E) to have directly or indirectly supplied, sold, or transferred to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, or been the recipient in the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo of, arms and related materiel, including military aircraft and equipment, or advice, training, or assistance, including financing and financial assistance, related to military activities;Start Printed Page 64106
(F) to have materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services in support of, the activities described in subsections (a)(ii)(A) through (E) of this section or any person listed in or designated pursuant to this order; or
(G) to be owned or controlled by, or acting or purporting to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any person listed in or designated pursuant to this order.
(b) I hereby determine that, to the extent section 203(b)(2) of the IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)) may apply, the making of donations of the type of articles specified in such section by, to, or for the benefit of any person listed in or designated pursuant to subsection (a) of this section would seriously impair my ability to deal with the national emergency declared in this order, and I hereby prohibit such donations as provided by subsection (a) of this section.
(c) The prohibitions in subsection (a) of this section include but are not limited to (i) the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any person listed in or designated pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, and (ii) the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.
Sec. 2. (a) Any transaction by a United States person or within the United States that evades or avoids, has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
(b) Any conspiracy formed to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
Sec. 3. For the purposes of this order:
(a) the term “person” means an individual or entity;
(b) the term “entity” means a partnership, association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization; and
(c) the term “United States person” means any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States.
Sec. 4. For those persons listed in or designated pursuant to this order who might have a constitutional presence in the United States, I find that, because of the ability to transfer funds or other assets instantaneously, prior notice to such persons of measures to be taken pursuant to this order would render these measures ineffectual. I therefore determine that for these measures to be effective in addressing the national emergency declared in this order, there need be no prior notice of a listing or determination made pursuant to subsection 1(a) of this order.
Sec. 5. The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by the IEEPA and the UNPA as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government, consistent with applicable law. All executive agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order and, where appropriate, to advise the Secretary of the Treasury in a timely manner of the measures taken. The Secretary of the Treasury shall ensure compliance with those provisions of section 401 of the NEA (50 U.S.C. 1641) applicable to the Department of the Treasury in relation to this order.
Sec. 6. The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to submit the recurring and final reports to the Congress on the national emergency declared in this order, consistent Start Printed Page 64107with section 401(c) of the NEA (50 U.S.C. 1641(c)) and section 204(c) of the IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1703(c)).
Sec. 7. The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized, subsequent to the issuance of this order, to determine, and to take necessary action to give effect to that determination, that circumstances no longer warrant the blocking of the property and interests in property of, or the prohibiting of transactions with, a person listed in the Annex to this order.
Sec. 8. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right, benefit, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
Sec. 9. This order is effective at 12:01 a.m. eastern standard time on October 30, 2006.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
October 27, 2006.
Start Printed Page 64108
Executive Order 13414 of November 3, 2006
Amendment to Executive Order 13402, Strengthening Federal Efforts To Protect Against Identity Theft
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to amend the date by which the Identity Theft Task Force shall submit to the President its coordinated strategic plan, it is hereby ordered that section 3(a) of Executive Order 13402 of May 10, 2006, is amended to read as follows: “review the activities of executive branch departments, agencies, and instrumentalities relating to the policy set forth in section 1, and building upon these prior activities, prepare and submit in writing to the President by February 9, 2007, or as soon as practicable thereafter as the Chairman and Co-Chairman shall determine, a coordinated strategic plan to further improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the Federal Government's activities in the areas of identity theft awareness, prevention, detection, and prosecution.”.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13415 of December 1, 2006
Assignment of Certain Pay-Related Functions
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 301 of title 3, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Assignment of Functions. The functions of the President under sections 4505a, 5305, and 5377 of title 5, United States Code, are assigned to the Director of the Office of Personnel Management.
Sec. 2.
Revocations. (a) Sections 3 and 6 of Executive Order 12748 of February 1, 1991, as amended, are revoked. Sections 4, 5, 7, 8, and 9 of Executive Order 12748 are renumbered as sections 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7, respectively.
(b) Section 2 of Executive Order 12828 of January 5, 1993, is revoked. Section 3 of Executive Order 12828 is renumbered as section 2.
Sec. 3.
General Provision. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13416 of December 5, 2006
Strengthening Surface Transportation Security
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to strengthen the security of the Nation's surface transportation systems and thereby enhance the protection of the people, property, and territory of the United States of America against terrorist attacks, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. The security of our Nation's surface transportation systems is a national priority, vital to our economy, and essential to the security of our Nation. Federal, State, local, and tribal governments, the private sector, and the public share responsibility for the security of surface transportation. It is the policy of the United States to protect the people, property, and territory of the United States by facilitating the implementation of a comprehensive, coordinated, and efficient security program to protect surface transportation systems within and adjacent to the United States against terrorist attacks.
Sec. 2.
Definitions. For purposes of this order:
(a) “agencies” means those executive departments enumerated in 5 U.S.C. 101, independent establishments as defined by 5 U.S.C. 104(1), government corporations as defined by 5 U.S.C. 103(1), and the United States Postal Service;
(b) “Secretary” means the Secretary of Homeland Security;
(c) “security guideline” means any security-related guidance that the Secretary recommends, for implementation on a voluntary basis, to enhance the security of surface transportation;
(d) “security requirement” means any “regulatory action” as defined in section 3 of Executive Order 12866 of September 30, 1993, as amended (Regulatory Planning and Review), including security directives when appropriate, to implement measures to enhance the security of surface transportation;
(e) “surface transportation modes” means mass transit, commuter and long-distance passenger rail, freight rail, commercial vehicles (including intercity buses), and pipelines, and related infrastructure (including roads and highways), that are within the territory of the United States, but does not include electric grids; and
(f) “surface transportation” means any conveyance of people, goods, or commodities using one or more surface transportation modes.
Sec. 3.
Functions of the Secretary of Homeland Security. The Secretary is the principal Federal official responsible for infrastructure protection activities for surface transportation. To implement the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the Secretary shall, consistent with the National Infrastructure Protection Plan (NIPP), in coordination with the Secretary of Transportation, and in consultation with the heads of other relevant agencies:
(a) assess the security of each surface transportation mode and evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of current Federal Government surface transportation security initiatives; Start Printed Page 71034
(b) building upon current security initiatives, not later than December 31, 2006, develop a comprehensive transportation systems sector specific plan, as defined in the NIPP;
(c) not later than 90 days after the comprehensive transportation systems sector specific plan is completed, develop an annex to such plan that addresses each surface transportation mode, which shall also include, at a minimum—
(i) an identification of existing security guidelines and security requirements and any security gaps, a description of how the transportation systems sector specific plan will be implemented for such mode, and the respective roles, responsibilities, and authorities of Federal, State, local, and tribal governments and the private sector;
(ii) schedules and protocols for annual reviews of the effectiveness of surface transportation security-related information sharing mechanisms in bringing about the timely exchange of surface transportation security information among Federal, State, local, and tribal governments and the private sector, as appropriate; and
(iii) a process for assessing (A) compliance with any security guidelines and security requirements issued by the Secretary for surface transportation, and (B) the need for revision of such guidelines and requirements to ensure their continuing effectiveness;
(d) in consultation with State, local, and tribal government officials and the private sector, not later than 180 days after the date of this order, identify surface transportation modes, or components thereof, that are subject to high risk of terrorist attack, draft appropriate security guidelines or security requirements to mitigate such risks, and ensure that, prior to their issuance, draft security requirements are transmitted to the Office of Management and Budget for review in accordance with Executive Order 12866 and draft security guidelines receive appropriate interagency review;
(e) develop, implement, and lead a process, in collaboration with other agencies, State, local, and tribal governments, and the private sector, as appropriate, to coordinate research, development, testing, and evaluation of technologies (including alternative uses for commercial off-the-shelf technologies and products) relating to the protection of surface transportation, including—
(i) determining product and technology needs to inform the requirements for and prioritization of research, development, testing, and evaluation, based on the security guidelines and security requirements developed pursuant to subsection (c) of this section and evolving terrorist threats to the security of surface transportation;
(ii) collecting information on existing and planned research, development, testing, and evaluation efforts; and
(iii) not later than 180 days after the date of this order, consistent with section 313 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002, as amended (6 U.S.C. 193), establishing and making available to Federal, State, local, and tribal government entities, and private sector owners and operators of surface transportation systems, lists of available technologies and products relating to the protection of surface transportation; and
(f) use security grants authorized by law to assist in implementing security requirements and security guidelines issued pursuant to law and consistent with subsection (c) of this section.
Sec. 4.
Duties of Heads of Other Agencies. Heads of agencies, as appropriate, shall provide such assistance and information as the Secretary may request to implement this order.
Sec. 5.
General Provisions. This order:
(a) shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and the authorities of agencies, or heads of agencies, vested by law, and subject to the availability of appropriations; Start Printed Page 71035
(b) shall not be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, and legislative proposals; and
(c) is not intended to, and does not, create any rights or benefits, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13417 of December 6, 2006
Establishing an Emergency Board To Investigate Disputes Between Metro-North Railroad and Certain of Its Employees Represented by Certain Labor Organizations
Disputes exist between Metro-North Railroad (Metro-North) and certain of its employees represented by certain labor organizations. The labor organizations involved in these disputes are designated on the attached list, which is made a part of this order.
The disputes have not heretofore been adjusted under the provisions of the Railway Labor Act, as amended, 45 U.S.C. 151 et. seq. (RLA).
A party empowered by the RLA has requested that the President establish an emergency board pursuant to section 9A of the RLA (45 U.S.C. 159a).
Section 9A(c) of the RLA provides that the President, upon such request, shall appoint an emergency board to investigate and report on the disputes.
NOW, THEREFORE, by the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, including section 9A of the RLA, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment of Emergency Board (Board). There is established, effective 12:01 a.m. eastern standard time on December 7, 2006, a Board of three members to be appointed by the President to investigate and report on these disputes. No member shall be pecuniarily or otherwise interested in any organization of railroad employees or any carrier. The Board shall perform its functions subject to the availability of funds.
Sec. 2.
Report. The Board shall report to the President with respect to the disputes within 30 days of its creation.
Sec. 3.
Maintaining Conditions. As provided by section 9A(c) of the RLA, from the date of the creation of the Board and for 120 days thereafter, no change in the conditions out of which the disputes arose shall be made by the parties to the controversy, except by agreement of the parties.Start Printed Page 71460
Sec. 4.
Records Maintenance. The records and files of the Board are records of the Office of the President and upon the Board's termination shall be maintained in the physical custody of the National Mediation Board.
Sec. 5.
Expiration. The Board shall terminate upon the submission of the report provided for in section 2 of this order.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
December 6, 2006.
Start Printed Page 71461
Labor Organizations
International Association of Machinists & Aerospace Workers
International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers
International Brotherhood of Teamsters
Service Employees International Union-National Conference of Firemen & Oilers
Sheet Metal Workers' International Association
Transportation Communications International Union (including Transportation Communications International Union - American Railway and Airline Supervisors Association)
Transport Workers Union of America
Executive Order 13418 of December 14, 2006
Amendment to Executive Order 13317, Volunteers for Prosperity
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to add combating malaria as one of the objectives of the global prosperity agenda, it is hereby ordered that section 1(a) of Executive Order 13317 of September 25, 2003, is amended by:
(a) striking “, and stemming the spread of HIV/AIDS.” and inserting in lieu thereof “, stemming the spread of HIV/AIDS and controlling malaria.”; and
(b) striking “, and the Middle East Partnership Initiative.” and inserting in lieu thereof “, the Middle East Partnership Initiative, and the President's Malaria Initiative.”.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13419 of December 20, 2006
National Aeronautics Research and Development
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 204 of the National Science and Technology Policy, Organization, and Priorities Act of 1976, as amended (42 U.S.C. 6613), section 101(c) of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2005 (Public Law 109-155), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
National Aeronautics Research and Development Policy. Continued progress in aeronautics, the science of flight, is essential to America's economic success and the protection of America's security interests at home and around the globe. Accordingly, it shall be the policy of the United States to facilitate progress in aeronautics research and development (R&D) through appropriate funding and activities of the Federal Government, in cooperation with State, territorial, tribal, local, and foreign governments, international organizations, academic and research institutions, private organizations, and other entities, as appropriate. The Federal Government shall only undertake roles in supporting aeronautics R&D that are not more appropriately performed by the private sector. The National Aeronautics Research and Development Policy prepared by the National Science and Technology Council should, to the extent consistent with this order and its implementation, guide the aeronautics R&D programs of the United States through 2020.
Sec. 2.
Functions of the Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy. To implement the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy (the “Director”) shall:
(a) review the funding and activities of the Federal Government relating to aeronautics R&D;
(b) recommend to the President, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, and the heads of executive departments and agencies, as appropriate, such actions with respect to funding and activities of the Federal Government relating to aeronautics R&D as may be necessary to
(i) advance United States technological leadership in aeronautics;
(ii) support innovative research leading to significant advances in aeronautical concepts, technologies, and capabilities;
(iii) pursue and develop advanced aeronautics concepts and technologies, including those for advanced aircraft systems and air transportation management systems, to benefit America's security and effective and efficient national airspace management;
(iv) maintain and advance United States aeronautics research, development, test and evaluation infrastructure to provide effective experimental and computational capabilities in support of aeronautics R&D;
(v) facilitate the educational development of the future aeronautics workforce as needed to further Federal Government interests;
(vi) enhance coordination and communication among executive departments and agencies to maximize the effectiveness of Federal Government R&D resources; andStart Printed Page 77566
(vii) ensure appropriate Federal Government coordination with State, territorial, tribal, local, and foreign governments, international organizations, academic and research institutions, private organizations, and other entities.
Sec. 3.
Implementation of National Aeronautics Research and Development Policy. To implement the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the Director shall:
(a) develop and, not later than 1 year after the date of this order, submit for approval by the President a plan for national aeronautics R&D and for related infrastructure, (the “plan”), and thereafter submit, not less often than biennially, to the President for approval any changes to the plan;
(b) monitor and report to the President as appropriate on the implementation of the approved plan;
(c) ensure that executive departments and agencies conducting aeronautics R&D:
(i) obtain and exchange information and advice, as appropriate, from organizations and individuals outside the Federal Government in support of Federal Government planning and performance of aeronautics R&D;
(ii) develop and implement, as appropriate, measures for improving dissemination of R&D results and facilitating technology transition from R&D to applications; and
(iii) identify and promote innovative policies and approaches that complement and enhance Federal Government aeronautics R&D investment; and
(d) report to the President on the results of the efforts of executive departments and agencies to implement paragraphs (c)(i) through (iii) of this section.
Sec. 4.
General Provisions. (a) In implementing this order, the Director shall:
(i) obtain as appropriate the assistance of the National Science and Technology Council in the performance of the Director's functions under this order, consistent with Executive Order 12881 of November 23, 1993, as amended;
(ii) coordinate as appropriate with the Director of the Office of Management and Budget; and
(iii) obtain information and advice from all sources as appropriate, including individuals associated with academic and research institutions and private organizations.
(b) The functions of the President under subsection (c) of section 101 of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2005, except the function of designation, are assigned to the Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy. In performing these assigned functions, the Director shall, as appropriate, consult the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Transportation, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, and other heads of executive departments and agencies as appropriate. The Director also shall ensure that all actions taken in the performance of such functions are consistent with the authority set forth in subsections (a) through (d) of section 6 of Executive Order 13346 of July 8, 2004.
(c) This order shall be implemented in a manner consistent with: (i) applicable law, including section 102A
(i) of the National Security Act of 1947, as amended (50 U.S.C. 403-1(i)), and subject to the availability of appropriations; and
(ii) statutory authority of the principal officers of executive departments and agencies as the heads of their respective departments and agencies.
(d) This order shall not be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, and legislative proposals.Start Printed Page 77567
(e) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any rights or benefits, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13420 of December 21, 2006
Adjustments of Certain Rates of Pay
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the laws cited herein, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Statutory Pay Systems. The rates of basic pay or salaries of the statutory pay systems (as defined in 5 U.S.C. 5302(1)), as adjusted under 5 U.S.C. 5303(a), are set forth on the schedules attached hereto and made a part hereof:
(a) The General Schedule (5 U.S.C. 5332(a)) at Schedule 1;
(b) The Foreign Service Schedule (22 U.S.C. 3963) at Schedule 2; and
(c) The schedules for the Veterans Health Administration of the Department of Veterans Affairs (38 U.S.C. 7306, 7404; section 301(a) of Public Law 102-40) at Schedule 3.
Sec. 2.
Senior Executive Service. The ranges of rates of basic pay for senior executives in the Senior Executive Service, as established pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 5382, are set forth on Schedule 4 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 3.
Certain Executive, Legislative, and Judicial Salaries. The rates of basic pay or salaries for the following offices and positions are set forth on the schedules attached hereto and made a part hereof:
(a) The Executive Schedule (5 U.S.C. 5312-5318) at Schedule 5;
(b) The Vice President (3 U.S.C. 104) and the Congress (2 U.S.C. 31, and section 137 of Public Law 109-289, division B, as amended by section 7 of Public Law 109-383) at Schedule 6; and
(c) Justices and judges (28 U.S.C. 5, 44(d), 135, 252, and 461(a); section 140 of Public Law 97-92), at Schedule 7.
Sec. 4.
Uniformed Services. Pursuant to section 601(a)-(c) of Public Law 109-364, the rates of monthly basic pay (37 U.S.C. 203(a)) for members of the uniformed services, as adjusted under 37 U.S.C. 1009, and the rate of monthly cadet or midshipman pay (37 U.S.C. 203(c)) are set forth on Schedule 8 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 5.
Locality-Based Comparability Payments.
(a) Pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 5304a, locality-based comparability payments shall be paid in accordance with Schedule 9 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
(b) The Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall take such actions as may be necessary to implement these payments and to publish appropriate notice of such payments in the Federal Register.
Sec. 6.
Administrative Law Judges. The rates of basic pay for administrative law judges, as adjusted under 5 U.S.C. 5372(b)(4), are set forth on Schedule 10 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 7.
Effective Dates. Rates for the Congress, under Schedule 6, are effective on February 16, 2007. Schedule 7 reflects continuation of the pay rates in effect as of the first day of the applicable pay period beginning on or after January 1, 2006. Schedule 8 is effective on January 1, 2007. The other schedules contained herein are effective on the first day of the first applicable pay period beginning on or after January 1, 2007.Start Printed Page 77572
Sec. 8.
Prior Order Superseded. Executive Order 13393 of December 22, 2005, is superseded.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
December 21, 2006.
Start Printed Page 77573
Start Printed Page 77574
Start Printed Page 77575
Start Printed Page 77576
Start Printed Page 77577
Start Printed Page 77578
Start Printed Page 77579
Start Printed Page 77580
Start Printed Page 425
Executive Order 13421 of December 28, 2006
Providing for the Closing of Government Departments and Agencies on January 2, 2007
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. All executive departments, independent establishments, and other governmental agencies shall be closed on January 2, 2007, as a mark of respect for Gerald R. Ford, the thirty-eighth President of the United States. That day shall be considered as falling within the scope of Executive Order 11582 of February 11, 1971, and of 5 U.S.C. 5546 and 6103(b) and other similar statutes insofar as they relate to the pay and leave of employees of the United States.
Sec. 2. The first sentence of section 1 of this order shall not apply to those offices and installations, or parts thereof, in the Department of State, the Department of Defense, the Department of Justice, the Department of Homeland Security, or other departments, independent establishments, and governmental agencies that the heads thereof determine should remain open for reasons of national security or defense or other essential public business.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13422 of January 18, 2007
Further Amendment to Executive Order 12866 on Regulatory Planning and Review
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered that Executive Order 12866 of September 30, 1993, as amended, is further amended as follows:
Section 1. Section 1 is amended as follows:
(a) Section 1(b)(1) is amended to read as follows:
“(1) Each agency shall identify in writing the specific market failure (such as externalities, market power, lack of information) or other specific problem that it intends to address (including, where applicable, the failures of public institutions) that warrant new agency action, as well as assess the significance of that problem, to enable assessment of whether any new regulation is warranted.”
(b) by inserting in section 1(b)(7) after “regulation” the words “or guidance document”.
(c) by inserting in section 1(b)(10) in both places after “regulations” the words “and guidance documents”.
(d) by inserting in section 1(b)(11) after “its regulations” the words “and guidance documents”.
(e) by inserting in section 1(b)(12) after “regulations” the words “and guidance documents”.
Sec. 2. Section 2 is amended as follows:
(a) by inserting in section 2(a) in both places after “regulations” the words “and guidance documents”.
(b) by inserting in section 2(b) in both places after “regulations” the words “and guidance documents”.
Sec. 3. Section 3 is amended as follows:
(a) by striking in section 3(d) “or `rule' ” after “ `Regulation' ”;
(b) by striking in section 3(d)(1) “or rules” after “Regulations”;
(c) by striking in section 3(d)(2) “or rules” after “Regulations”;
(d) by striking in section 3(d)(3) “or rules” after “Regulations”;
(e) by striking in section 3(e) “rule or” from “final rule or regulation”;
(f) by striking in section 3(f) “rule or” from “rule or regulation”;
(g) by inserting after section 3(f) the following:
“(g) “Guidance document” means an agency statement of general applicability and future effect, other than a regulatory action, that sets forth a policy on a statutory, regulatory, or technical issue or an interpretation of a statutory or regulatory issue.
(h) “Significant guidance document” —
(1) Means a guidance document disseminated to regulated entities or the general public that, for purposes of this order, may reasonably be anticipated to:Start Printed Page 2764
(A) Lead to an annual effect of $100 million or more or adversely affect in a material way the economy, a sector of the economy, productivity, competition, jobs, the environment, public health or safety, or State, local, or tribal governments or communities;
(B) Create a serious inconsistency or otherwise interfere with an action taken or planned by another agency;
(C) Materially alter the budgetary impact of entitlements, grants, user fees, or loan programs or the rights or obligations of recipients thereof; or
(D) Raise novel legal or policy issues arising out of legal mandates, the President's priorities, or the principles set forth in this Executive order; and (2) Does not include:
(A) Guidance documents on regulations issued in accordance with the formal rulemaking provisions of 5 U.S.C. 556, 557;
(B) Guidance documents that pertain to a military or foreign affairs function of the United States, other than procurement regulations and regulations involving the import or export of non-defense articles and services;
(C) Guidance documents on regulations that are limited to agency organization, management, or personnel matters; or
(D) Any other category of guidance documents exempted by the Administrator of OIRA.”
Sec. 4. Section 4 is amended as follows:
(a) Section 4(a) is amended to read as follows: “The Director may convene a meeting of agency heads and other government personnel as appropriate to seek a common understanding of priorities and to coordinate regulatory efforts to be accomplished in the upcoming year.”
(b) The last sentence of section 4(c)(1) is amended to read as follows: “Unless specifically authorized by the head of the agency, no rulemaking shall commence nor be included on the Plan without the approval of the agency's Regulatory Policy Office, and the Plan shall contain at a minimum:”.
(c) Section 4(c)(1)(B) is amended by inserting “of each rule as well as the agency's best estimate of the combined aggregate costs and benefits of all its regulations planned for that calendar year to assist with the identification of priorities” after “of the anticipated costs and benefits”.
(d) Section 4(c)(1)(C) is amended by inserting “, and specific citation to such statute, order, or other legal authority” after “court order”.
Sec. 5. Section 6 is amended as follows:
(a) by inserting in section 6(a)(1) “In consultation with OIRA, each agency may also consider whether to utilize formal rulemaking procedures under 5 U.S.C. 556 and 557 for the resolution of complex determinations” after “comment period of not less than 60 days.”
(b) by amending the first sentence of section 6(a)(2) to read as follows: “Within 60 days of the date of this Executive order, each agency head shall designate one of the agency's Presidential Appointees to be its Regulatory Policy Officer, advise OMB of such designation, and annually update OMB on the status of this designation.”
Sec. 6. Sections 9-11 are redesignated respectively as sections 10-12.
Sec. 7. After section 8, a new section 9 is inserted as follows:
“Sec. 9.
Significant Guidance Documents. Each agency shall provide OIRA, at such times and in the manner specified by the Administrator of OIRA, with advance notification of any significant guidance documents. Each agency shall take such steps as are necessary for its Regulatory Policy Officer to ensure the agency's compliance with the requirements of this section. Upon the request of the Administrator, for each matter identified as, or determined by the Administrator to be, a significant guidance document, the issuing agency shall provide to Start Printed Page 2765OIRA the content of the draft guidance document, together with a brief explanation of the need for the guidance document and how it will meet that need. The OIRA Administrator shall notify the agency when additional consultation will be required before the issuance of the significant guidance document.”
Sec. 8. Newly designated section 10 is amended to read as follows:
“Sec. 10.
Preservation of Agency Authority. Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the authority vested by law in an agency or the head thereof, including the authority of the Attorney General relating to litigation.”
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13423 of January 24, 2007
Strengthening Federal Environmental, Energy, and Transportation Management
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to strengthen the environmental, energy, and transportation management of Federal agencies, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. It is the policy of the United States that Federal agencies conduct their environmental, transportation, and energy-related activities under the law in support of their respective missions in an environmentally, economically and fiscally sound, integrated, continuously improving, efficient, and sustainable manner.
Sec. 2.
Goals for Agencies. In implementing the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the head of each agency shall:
(a) improve energy efficiency and reduce greenhouse gas emissions of the agency, through reduction of energy intensity by (i) 3 percent annually through the end of fiscal year 2015, or (ii) 30 percent by the end of fiscal year 2015, relative to the baseline of the agency's energy use in fiscal year 2003;
(b) ensure that (i) at least half of the statutorily required renewable energy consumed by the agency in a fiscal year comes from new renewable sources, and (ii) to the extent feasible, the agency implements renewable energy generation projects on agency property for agency use;
(c) beginning in FY 2008, reduce water consumption intensity, relative to the baseline of the agency's water consumption in fiscal year 2007, through life-cycle cost-effective measures by 2 percent annually through the end of fiscal year 2015 or 16 percent by the end of fiscal year 2015;
(d) require in agency acquisitions of goods and services (i) use of sustainable environmental practices, including acquisition of biobased, environmentally preferable, energy-efficient, water-efficient, and recycled-content products, and (ii) use of paper of at least 30 percent post-consumer fiber content;
(e) ensure that the agency (i) reduces the quantity of toxic and hazardous chemicals and materials acquired, used, or disposed of by the agency, (ii) increases diversion of solid waste as appropriate, and (iii) maintains cost-effective waste prevention and recycling programs in its facilities;
(f) ensure that (i) new construction and major renovation of agency buildings comply with the Guiding Principles for Federal Leadership in High Performance and Sustainable Buildings set forth in the Federal Leadership in High Performance and Sustainable Buildings Memorandum of Understanding (2006), and (ii) 15 percent of the existing Federal capital asset building inventory of the agency as of the end of fiscal year 2015 incorporates the sustainable practices in the Guiding Principles;
(g) ensure that, if the agency operates a fleet of at least 20 motor vehicles, the agency, relative to agency baselines for fiscal year 2005, (i) reduces the fleet's total consumption of petroleum products by 2 percent annually through the end of fiscal year 2015, (ii) increases the total fuel consumption that is non-petroleum-based by 10 percent annually, and (iii) uses plug-in hybrid (PIH) vehicles when PIH vehicles are commercially available at Start Printed Page 3920a cost reasonably comparable, on the basis of life-cycle cost, to non-PIH vehicles; and
(h) ensure that the agency (i) when acquiring an electronic product to meet its requirements, meets at least 95 percent of those requirements with an Electronic Product Environmental Assessment Tool (EPEAT)-registered electronic product, unless there is no EPEAT standard for such product, (ii) enables the Energy Star feature on agency computers and monitors, (iii) establishes and implements policies to extend the useful life of agency electronic equipment, and (iv) uses environmentally sound practices with respect to disposition of agency electronic equipment that has reached the end of its useful life.
Sec. 3.
Duties of Heads of Agencies. In implementing the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the head of each agency shall:
(a) implement within the agency sustainable practices for (i) energy efficiency, greenhouse gas emissions avoidance or reduction, and petroleum products use reduction, (ii) renewable energy, including bioenergy, (iii) water conservation, (iv) acquisition, (v) pollution and waste prevention and recycling, (vi) reduction or elimination of acquisition and use of toxic or hazardous chemicals, (vii) high performance construction, lease, operation, and maintenance of buildings, (viii) vehicle fleet management, and (ix) electronic equipment management;
(b) implement within the agency environmental management systems (EMS) at all appropriate organizational levels to ensure (i) use of EMS as the primary management approach for addressing environmental aspects of internal agency operations and activities, including environmental aspects of energy and transportation functions, (ii) establishment of agency objectives and targets to ensure implementation of this order, and (iii) collection, analysis, and reporting of information to measure performance in the implementation of this order;
(c) establish within the agency programs for (i) environmental management training, (ii) environmental compliance review and audit, and (iii) leadership awards to recognize outstanding environmental, energy, or transportation management performance in the agency;
(d) within 30 days after the date of this order (i) designate a senior civilian officer of the United States, compensated annually in an amount at or above the amount payable at level IV of the Executive Schedule, to be responsible for implementation of this order within the agency, (ii) report such designation to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality, and (iii) assign the designated official the authority and duty to (A) monitor and report to the head of the agency on agency activities to carry out subsections (a) and (b) of this section, and (B) perform such other duties relating to the implementation of this order within the agency as the head of the agency deems appropriate;
(e) ensure that contracts entered into after the date of this order for contractor operation of government-owned facilities or vehicles require the contractor to comply with the provisions of this order with respect to such facilities or vehicles to the same extent as the agency would be required to comply if the agency operated the facilities or vehicles;
(f) ensure that agreements, permits, leases, licenses, or other legally-binding obligations between the agency and a tenant or concessionaire entered into after the date of this order require, to the extent the head of the agency determines appropriate, that the tenant or concessionaire take actions relating to matters within the scope of the contract that facilitate the agency's compliance with this order;
(g) provide reports on agency implementation of this order to the Chairman of the Council on such schedule and in such format as the Chairman of the Council may require; and Start Printed Page 3921
(h) provide information and assistance to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, the Chairman of the Council, and the Federal Environmental Executive.
Sec. 4.
Additional Duties of the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality. In implementing the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality:
(a) (i) shall establish a Steering Committee on Strengthening Federal Environmental, Energy, and Transportation Management to advise the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and the Chairman of the Council on the performance of their functions under this order that shall consist exclusively of (A) the Federal Environmental Executive, who shall chair, convene and preside at meetings of, determine the agenda of, and direct the work of, the Steering Committee, and (B) the senior officials designated under section 3(d)(i) of this order, and (ii) may establish subcommittees of the Steering Committee, to assist the Steering Committee in developing the advice of the Steering Committee on particular subjects;
(b) may, after consultation with the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and the Steering Committee, issue instructions to implement this order, other than instructions within the authority of the Director to issue under section 5 of this order; and
(c) shall administer a presidential leadership award program to recognize exceptional and outstanding environmental, energy, or transportation management performance and excellence in agency efforts to implement this order.
Sec. 5.
Duties of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget. In implementing the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall, after consultation with the Chairman of the Council and the Steering Committee, issue instructions to the heads of agencies concerning:
(a) periodic evaluation of agency implementation of this order;
(b) budget and appropriations matters relating to implementation of this order;
(c) implementation of section 2(d) of this order; and
(d) amendments of the Federal Acquisition Regulation as necessary to implement this order.
Sec. 6.
Duties of the Federal Environmental Executive. A Federal Environmental Executive designated by the President shall head the Office of the Federal Environmental Executive, which shall be maintained in the Environmental Protection Agency for funding and administrative purposes. In implementing the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the Federal Environmental Executive shall:
(a) monitor, and advise the Chairman of the Council on, performance by agencies of functions assigned by sections 2 and 3 of this order;
(b) submit a report to the President, through the Chairman of the Council, not less often than once every 2 years, on the activities of agencies to implement this order; and
(c) advise the Chairman of the Council on the Chairman's exercise of authority granted by subsection 4(c) of this order.
Sec. 7.
Limitations. (a) This order shall apply to an agency with respect to the activities, personnel, resources, and facilities of the agency that are located within the United States. The head of an agency may provide that this order shall apply in whole or in part with respect to the activities, personnel, resources, and facilities of the agency that are not located within the United States, if the head of the agency determines that such application is in the interest of the United States. Start Printed Page 3922
(b) The head of an agency shall manage activities, personnel, resources, and facilities of the agency that are not located within the United States, and with respect to which the head of the agency has not made a determination under subsection (a) of this section, in a manner consistent with the policy set forth in section 1 of this order to the extent the head of the agency determines practicable.
Sec. 8.
Exemption Authority. (a) The Director of National Intelligence may exempt an intelligence activity of the United States, and related personnel, resources, and facilities, from the provisions of this order, other than this subsection and section 10, to the extent the Director determines necessary to protect intelligence sources and methods from unauthorized disclosure.
(b) The head of an agency may exempt law enforcement activities of that agency, and related personnel, resources, and facilities, from the provisions of this order, other than this subsection and section 10, to the extent the head of an agency determines necessary to protect undercover operations from unauthorized disclosure.
(c) (i) The head of an agency may exempt law enforcement, protective, emergency response, or military tactical vehicle fleets of that agency from the provisions of this order, other than this subsection and section 10.
(ii) Heads of agencies shall manage fleets to which paragraph (i) of this subsection refers in a manner consistent with the policy set forth in section 1 of this order to the extent they determine practicable.
(d) The head of an agency may submit to the President, through the Chairman of the Council, a request for an exemption of an agency activity, and related personnel, resources, and facilities, from this order.
Sec. 9.
Definitions. As used in this order:
(a) “agency” means an executive agency as defined in section 105 of title 5, United States Code, excluding the Government Accountability Office;
(b) “Chairman of the Council” means the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality, including in the Chairman's capacity as Director of the Office of Environmental Quality;
(c) “Council” means the Council on Environmental Quality;
(d) “environmental” means environmental aspects of internal agency operations and activities, including those environmental aspects related to energy and transportation functions;
(e) “greenhouse gases” means carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, and sulfur hexafluoride;
(f) “life-cycle cost-effective” means the life-cycle costs of a product, project, or measure are estimated to be equal to or less than the base case (i.e., current or standard practice or product);
(g) “new renewable sources” means sources of renewable energy placed into service after January 1, 1999;
(h) “renewable energy” means energy produced by solar, wind, biomass, landfill gas, ocean (including tidal, wave, current and thermal), geothermal, municipal solid waste, or new hydroelectric generation capacity achieved from increased efficiency or additions of new capacity at an existing hydroelectric project;
(i) “energy intensity” means energy consumption per square foot of building space, including industrial or laboratory facilities;
(j) “Steering Committee” means the Steering Committee on Strengthening Federal Environmental, Energy, and Transportation Management established under subsection 4(b) of this order;
(k) “sustainable” means to create and maintain conditions, under which humans and nature can exist in productive harmony, that permit fulfilling Start Printed Page 3923the social, economic, and other requirements of present and future generations of Americans; and
(l) “United States” when used in a geographical sense, means the fifty states, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the United States Virgin Islands, and the Northern Mariana Islands, and associated territorial waters and airspace.
Sec. 10.
General Provisions. (a) This order shall be implemented in a manner consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(b) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(c) This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, entities, officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
Sec. 11.
Revocations; Conforming Provisions. (a) The following are revoked:
(i) Executive Order 13101 of September 14, 1998;
(ii) Executive Order 13123 of June 3, 1999;
(iii) Executive Order 13134 of August 12, 1999, as amended;
(iv) Executive Order 13148 of April 21, 2000; and
(v) Executive Order 13149 of April 21, 2000.
(b) In light of subsection 317(e) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2002 (Public Law 107-107), not later than January 1 of each year through and including 2010, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the Senate and the House of Representatives a report regarding progress made toward achieving the energy efficiency goals of the Department of Defense.
(c) Section 3(b)(vi) of Executive Order 13327 of February 4, 2004, is amended by striking “Executive Order 13148 of April 21, 2000” and inserting in lieu thereof “other executive orders”.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 4409
Executive Order 13424 of January 26, 2007
Further Amendment to Executive Order 13285, Relating to the President's Council on Service and Civic Participation
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to extend the President's Council on Service and Civic Participation, it is hereby ordered that Executive Order 13285 of January 29, 2003, as amended, is further amended by revising section 4(b) to read as follows: “(b) Unless further extended by the President, this order shall expire on November 30, 2008.”
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13425 of February 14, 2007
Trial of Alien Unlawful Enemy Combatants by Military
Commission
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Military Commissions Act of 2006 (Public Law 109-366), the Authorization for Use of Military Force (Public Law 107-40), and section 948b(b) of title 10, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment of Military Commissions. There are hereby established military commissions to try alien unlawful enemy combatants for offenses triable by military commission as provided in chapter 47A of title 10.
Sec. 2.
Definitions. As used in this order:
(a) “unlawful enemy combatant” has the meaning provided for that term in section 948a(1) of title 10; and
(b) “alien” means a person who is not a citizen of the United States.
Sec. 3.
Supersedure. This order supersedes any provision of the President's Military Order of November 13, 2001 (66 Fed. Reg. 57,833), that relates to trial by military commission, specifically including:
(a) section 4 of the Military Order; and
(b) any requirement in section 2 of the Military Order, as it relates to trial by military commission, for a determination of:
(i) reason to believe specified matters; or
(ii) the interest of the United States.
Sec. 4.
General Provisions. (a) This order shall be implemented in accordance with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(b) The heads of executive departments and agencies shall provide such information and assistance to the Secretary of Defense as may be necessary to implement this order and chapter 47A of title 10.
Start Printed Page 7738
(c) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13426 of March 6, 2007
Establishing a Commission on Care for America's Returning Wounded Warriors and a Task Force on Returning Global War on Terror Heroes
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to provide a comprehensive review of the care provided to America's returning Global War on Terror service men and women from the time they leave the battlefield through their return to civilian life, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment of Commission. There is established the President's Commission on Care for America's Returning Wounded Warriors (Commission).
Sec. 2.
Membership of Commission. The Commission shall be composed of nine members appointed by the President. The President shall designate two Co-Chairs from among the members of the Commission.
Sec. 3.
Mission of Commission. The mission of the Commission shall be to:
(a) examine the effectiveness of returning wounded service members' transition from deployment in support of the Global War on Terror to successful return to productive military service or civilian society, and recommend needed improvements;
(b) evaluate the coordination, management, and adequacy of the delivery of health care, disability, traumatic injury, education, employment, and other benefits and services to returning wounded Global War on Terror service members by Federal agencies as well as by the private sector, and recommend ways to ensure that programs provide high-quality services;
(c) (i) analyze the effectiveness of existing outreach to service members regarding such benefits and services, and service members' level of awareness of and ability to access these benefits and services, and (ii) identify ways to reduce barriers to and gaps in these benefits and services; and
(d) consult with foundations, veterans service organizations, non-profit groups, faith-based organizations, and others as appropriate, in performing the Commission's functions under subsections (a) through (c) of this section.
Sec. 4.
Administration of Commission.
(a) The Secretary of Defense shall, to the extent permitted by law, provide administrative support and funding for the Commission. To the extent permitted by law, office space, analytical support, and staff support for the Commission shall be provided by the Department of Defense.
(b) Members of the Commission shall serve without any compensation for their work on the Commission. Members of the Commission appointed from among private citizens of the United States, while engaged in the work of the Commission, may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in Government service (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707), consistent with the availability of funds.
(c) The Co-Chairs of the Commission shall select an Executive Director to coordinate administration of the Commission. Start Printed Page 10590
(d) The heads of executive branch departments and agencies shall, to the extent permitted by law, provide the Commission with information as requested by the Co-Chairs.
(e) The Co-Chairs of the Commission shall convene and preside at the meetings of the Commission, determine its agenda, and direct its work.
(f) The functions of the President under the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.)(Act), except for those in section 6 of that Act, that are applicable to the Commission, shall be performed by the Secretary of Defense, in accordance with the guidelines that have been issued by the Administrator of General Services.
Sec. 5.
Report of Commission. The Commission shall report its recommendations to the President through the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs. The Commission shall issue a final report by June 30, 2007, unless the Co-Chairs provide written notice to the President that an extension is necessary, in which case the Commission shall issue the final report by July 31, 2007.
Sec. 6.
Termination of Commission. The Commission shall terminate 30 days after submitting its final report, unless extended by the President prior to that date.
Sec. 7.
Establishment of Task Force. The Secretary of Veterans Affairs (Secretary) shall establish within the Department of Veterans Affairs for administrative purposes only an Interagency Task Force on Returning Global War on Terror Heroes (Task Force).
Sec. 8.
Membership and Operation of Task Force. The Task Force shall consist exclusively of the following members, or their designees who shall be at the Under Secretary level (or its equivalent) or higher:
(a) the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, who shall serve as Chair;
(b) the Secretary of Defense;
(c) the Secretary of Labor;
(d) the Secretary of Health and Human Services;
(e) the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development;
(f) the Secretary of Education;
(g) the Director of the Office of Management and Budget;
(h) the Administrator of the Small Business Administration; and
(i) other officers or employees of the United States, as determined by the Secretary.
The Secretary or the Secretary's designee shall convene and preside at meetings of the Task Force and direct its work. The Secretary shall designate an official of the Department of Veterans Affairs to serve as the Executive Secretary of the Task Force, and the Executive Secretary shall head any staff assigned to the Task Force.
Sec. 9.
Mission of Task Force. The mission of the Task Force shall be to:
(a) identify and examine existing Federal services that currently are provided to returning Global War on Terror service members;
(b) identify existing gaps in such services;
(c) seek recommendations from appropriate Federal agencies on ways to fill those gaps as effectively and expeditiously as possible using existing resources; and
(d) (i) ensure that in providing services to these service members, appropriate Federal agencies are communicating and cooperating effectively, and (ii) facilitate the fostering of agency communications and cooperation through informal and formal means, as appropriate. Start Printed Page 10591
Sec. 10.
Administration of Task Force. The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall, to the extent permitted by law, provide administrative support and funding for the Task Force.
Sec. 11.
Action Plan of Task Force. Consistent with applicable law, the Task Force shall outline a Government-wide action plan that identifies existing Federal services for returning Global War on Terror service men and women and that ensures the provision of such services to those service members as effectively and expeditiously as possible. The Task Force shall submit the action plan to the President within 45 days of the date of this order.
Sec. 12.
Termination of Task Force. The Secretary, with the approval of the President, shall terminate the Task Force upon the completion of its duties.
Sec. 13.
General Provisions.
(a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect (i) authority granted by law to an agency or the head thereof, or (ii) functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(b) This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(c) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees, agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13427 of March 7, 2007
Extending Privileges and Immunities to the Permanent
Observer Mission of the Holy See to the United Nations
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 7(b) of the Department of State Authorities Act of 2006 (22 U.S.C. 288l), I hereby extend to the Permanent Observer Mission of the Holy See to the United Nations in New York, and to its members, the privileges and immunities enjoyed by the diplomatic missions of member states to the United Nations, and members of such missions, subject to corresponding conditions and obligations.
This extension of privileges and immunities is not intended to abridge in any respect privileges or immunities that the Permanent Observer Mission of the Holy See to the United Nations in New York and its members otherwise may have acquired or may acquire by law.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13428 of April 2, 2007
Renaming a National Forest in the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 1 of the Act of June 4, 1897 (16 U.S.C. 473) and section 1 of the Act of July 1, 1902 (48 U.S.C. 746), and to rename the Caribbean National Forest in the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. The Caribbean National Forest in the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico is hereby renamed the “El Yunque National Forest.”
Sec. 2. Previous references to the Caribbean National Forest in Executive Order 7059-A of June 4, 1935, and Executive Order 10992 of February 9, 1962, shall, for all purposes hereafter, be deemed references to the “El Yunque National Forest.”
Sec. 3. This order shall be implemented in accordance with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
Sec. 4. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, agencies, entities, officers, employees, or agents thereof, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13429 of April 4, 2007
Establishing an Emergency Board To Investigate a Dispute Between Metro-North Railroad and Its Maintenance of Way Employees Represented by the International Brotherhood of Teamsters
A dispute exists between Metro-North Railroad and its maintenance of way employees represented by the International Brotherhood of Teamsters.
The dispute has not heretofore been adjusted under the provisions of the Railway Labor Act, as amended, 45 U.S.C. 151-188 (the “Act”).
A first emergency board to investigate and report on this dispute and disputes of other employees represented by other labor organizations was established on December 7, 2006, by Executive Order 13417 of December 6, 2006. The emergency board terminated upon issuance of its report. Subsequently, its recommendations were not accepted by the parties.
A party empowered by the Act has requested that the President establish a second emergency board pursuant to section 9A of the Act (45 U.S.C. 159a).
Section 9A(e) of the Act provides that the President, upon such request, shall appoint a second emergency board to investigate and report on the dispute.
NOW, THEREFORE, by the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, including section 9A of the Act, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment of Emergency Board (Board). There is established, effective April 6, 2007, a Board of three members to be appointed by the President to investigate and report on this dispute. No member shall be pecuniarily or otherwise interested in any organization of railroad employees or any carrier. The Board shall perform its functions subject to the availability of funds.
Sec. 2.
Report. Within 30 days after the creation of the Board, the parties to the dispute shall submit to the Board final offers for settlement of the dispute. Within 30 days after the submission of final offers for settlement of the dispute, the Board shall submit a report to the President setting forth its selection of the most reasonable offer.
Sec. 3.
Maintaining Conditions. As provided by section 9A(h) of the Act, from the time a request to establish a second emergency board is made until 60 days after the Board submits its report to the President, the parties to the controversy shall make no change in the conditions out of which the dispute arose except by agreement of the parties. Start Printed Page 18102
Sec. 4.
Records Maintenance. The records and files of the Board are records of the Office of the President and upon the Board's termination shall be maintained in the physical custody of the National Mediation Board.
Sec. 5.
Expiration. The Board shall terminate upon the submission of the report provided for in section 2 of this order.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13430 of April 18, 2007
2007 Amendments to the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including chapter 47 of title 10, United States Code (Uniform Code of Military Justice, 10 U.S.C. 801-946), and in order to prescribe amendments to the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, prescribed by Executive Order 12473 of April 13, 1984, as amended, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Part II of the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, is amended as follows:
(a) R.C.M. 703(b)(1) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentences:
“With the consent of both the accused and Government, the military judge may authorize any witness to testify via remote means. Over a party's objection, the military judge may authorize any witness to testify on interlocutory questions via remote means or similar technology if the practical difficulties of producing the witness outweigh the significance of the witness' personal appearance (although such testimony will not be admissible over the accused's objection as evidence on the ultimate issue of guilt). Factors to be considered include, but are not limited to, the costs of producing the witness; the timing of the request for production of the witness; the potential delay in the interlocutory proceeding that may be caused by the production of the witness; the willingness of the witness to testify in person; the likelihood of significant interference with military operational deployment, mission accomplishment, or essential training; and, for child witnesses, the traumatic effect of providing in-court testimony.”
(b) R.C.M. 804 is amended by redesignating paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) as paragraphs (c), (d), and (e), respectively, and inserting the following new paragraph (b):
“(b) Presence by remote means. If authorized by the regulations of the Secretary concerned, the military judge may order the use of audiovisual technology, such as videoteleconferencing technology, between the parties and the military judge for purposes of Article 39(a) sessions. Use of such audiovisual technology will satisfy the “presence” requirement of the accused only when the accused has a defense counsel physically present at his location. Such technology may include two or more remote sites as long as all parties can see and hear each other.”
(c) R.C.M. 804(c)(2) is redesignated as R.C.M. 804(d)(2) and amended to read as follows:
“(2) Procedure. The accused's absence will be conditional upon his being able to view the witness' testimony from a remote location. Normally, transmission of the testimony will include a system that will transmit the accused's image and voice into the courtroom from a remote location as well as transmission of the child's testimony from the courtroom to the accused's location. A one-way transmission may be used if deemed necessary by the military judge. The accused will also be provided private, Start Printed Page 20214contemporaneous communication with his counsel. The procedures described herein shall be employed unless the accused has made a knowing and affirmative waiver of these procedures.”
(d) R.C.M. 805(a) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence:
“If authorized by regulations of the Secretary concerned, for purposes of Article 39(a) sessions solely, the presence of the military judge at Article 39(a) sessions may be satisfied by the use of audiovisual technology, such as videoteleconferencing technology.”
(e) R.C.M. 805(c) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentences:
“If authorized by regulations of the Secretary concerned, for purposes of Article 39(a) sessions solely, the presence of counsel at Article 39(a) sessions may be satisfied by the use of audiovisual technology, such as videoteleconferencing technology. At least one qualified defense counsel shall be physically present with the accused.”
(f) R.C.M. 914A is amended by deleting the third sentence of paragraph (a).
(g) R.C.M. 914A is further amended by redesignating paragraph (b) as paragraph (c) and inserting the following new paragraph (b):
“(b) Definition. As used in this rule, “remote live testimony” includes, but is not limited to, testimony by videoteleconference, closed circuit television, or similar technology.”
(h) New Rule R.C.M. 914B is inserted after R.C.M. 914A:
“Rule 914B. Use of remote testimony.
(a) General procedures. The military judge shall determine the procedures used to take testimony via remote means. At a minimum, all parties shall be able to hear each other, those in attendance at the remote site shall be identified, and the accused shall be permitted private, contemporaneous communication with his counsel.
(b) Definition. As used in this rule, testimony via “remote means” includes, but is not limited to, testimony by videoteleconference, closed circuit television, telephone, or similar technology.”
(i) R.C.M. 1001(e)(2)(D) is amended by deleting the “or” before “former testimony” and inserting “, or testimony by remote means” after “former testimony.”
Sec. 2. Part IV of the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, is amended as follows:
(a) Paragraph 4.c.(6) is amended by redesignating paragraph (f) as paragraph (g) and inserting the following new paragraph (f):
“(f) Article 119a-attempting to kill an unborn child”
(b) Paragraph 12a is amended by replacing the word “Transportation” with the words “Homeland Security”.
(c) Paragraph 35a is amended to read as follows:
“(a) Any person subject to this chapter who —
(1) operates or physically controls any vehicle, aircraft, or vessel in a reckless or wanton manner or while impaired by a substance described in section 912a(b) of this title (Article 112a(b)); or
(2) operates or is in actual physical control of any vehicle, aircraft, or vessel while drunk or when the alcohol concentration in the person's blood or breath is equal to or exceeds the applicable limit under subsection (b), shall be punished as a court-martial may direct.
(b)(1) For purposes of subsection (a), the applicable limit on the alcohol concentration in a person's blood or breath is as follows: Start Printed Page 20215
(A) In the case of the operation or control of a vehicle, aircraft, or vessel in the United States, such limit is the lesser of —
(i) the blood alcohol content limit under the law of the State in which the conduct occurred, except as may be provided under paragraph (2) for conduct on a military installation that is in more than one State; or
(ii) the blood alcohol content limit specified in paragraph (3).
(B) In the case of the operation or control of a vehicle, aircraft, or vessel outside the United States, the applicable blood alcohol content limit is the blood alcohol content limit specified in paragraph (3) or such lower limit as the Secretary of Defense may by regulation prescribe.
(2) In the case of a military installation that is in more than one State, if those States have different blood alcohol content limits under their respective State laws, the Secretary may select one such blood alcohol content limit to apply uniformly on that installation.
(3) For purposes of paragraph (1), the blood alcohol content limit with respect to alcohol concentration in a person's blood is 0.10 grams of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood and with respect to alcohol concentration in a person's breath is 0.10 grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath, as shown by chemical analysis.
(4) In this subsection:
(A) The term “blood alcohol content limit” means the amount of alcohol concentration in a person's blood or breath at which operation or control of a vehicle, aircraft, or vessel is prohibited.
(B) The term “United States” includes the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, and American Samoa and the term “State” includes each of those jurisdictions.
(d) Paragraph 35b(2)(c) is amended to read as follows:
“(c) the alcohol concentration in the accused's blood or breath equaled to or exceeded the applicable limit under subparagraph (b) of paragraph 35a. [NOTE: If injury resulted add the following element]”
(e) Para 35f is amended to read as follows:
“In that _________ (personal jurisdiction data), did (at/onboard location)(subject matter jurisdiction data, if required), on or about _______ 20__, (in the motor pool area)(near the Officer's Club)(at the intersection of _____ and ______)(while in the Gulf of Mexico)(while in flight over North America) physically control [a vehicle, to wit: (a truck)(a passenger car)(______)] [an aircraft, to wit: (an AH 64 helicopter)(an F 14 A fighter)(a KC 135 tanker)(_________)][a vessel, to wit: (the aircraft carrier USS)(the Coast Cutter)(_____)], [while drunk][while impaired by _____][while the alcohol concentration in his (blood or breath equaled or exceeded the applicable limit under subparagraph (b) of paragraph 35a) as shown by chemical analysis][in a (reckless)(wanton) manner by (attempting to pass another vehicle on a sharp curve)(by ordering that the aircraft be flown below the authorized altitude)][and did thereby cause said (vehicle)(aircraft)(vessel) to (strike and )(injure _________)].”
(f) By inserting the new paragraph 44a:
“44a. Article 119a—Death or injury of an unborn child
a. Text.
(a)(1) Any person subject to this chapter who engages in conduct that violates any of the provisions of law listed in subsection (b) and thereby causes the death of, or bodily injury (as defined in section 1365 of title 18 to, a child who is in utero at the time the conduct takes place, is guilty of a separate offense under this section and shall, upon conviction, be punished by such punishment, other than death, as a court-martial Start Printed Page 20216may direct, which shall be consistent with the punishments prescribed by the President for that conduct had that injury or death occurred to the unborn child's mother.
(2) An offense under this section does not require proof that —
(i) the person engaging in the conduct had knowledge or should have had knowledge that the victim of the underlying offense was pregnant; or
(ii) the accused intended to cause the death of, or bodily injury to, the unborn child.
(3) If the person engaging in the conduct thereby intentionally kills or attempts to kill the unborn child, that person shall, instead of being punished under paragraph (1), be punished as provided under sections 880, 918, and 919(a) of this title (articles 80, 118, and 119(a)) for intentionally killing or attempting to kill a human being.
(4) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the death penalty shall not be imposed for an offense under this section.
(b) The provisions referred to in subsection (a) are sections 918, 919(a), 919(b)(2), 920(a), 922, 924, 926, and 928 of this title (articles 118, 119(a), 119(b)(2), 120(a), 122, 124, 126, and 128).
(c) Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit the prosecution
(1) of any person authorized by state or federal law to perform abortions for conduct relating to an abortion for which the consent of the pregnant woman, or a person authorized by law to act on her behalf, has been obtained or for which such consent is implied by law;
(2) of any person for any medical treatment of the pregnant woman or her unborn child; or
(3) of any woman with respect to her unborn child.
(d) As used in this section, the term “unborn child” means a child in utero, and the term “child in utero” or “child who is in utero” means a member of the species homo sapiens, at any stage of development, who is carried in the womb.
b. Elements.
(1) Injuring an unborn child.
(a) That the accused was engaged in the [(murder (article 118)), (voluntary manslaughter (article 119(a))), (involuntary manslaughter (article 119(b)(2))), (rape (article 120)), (robbery (article 122)), (maiming (article 124)), (assault (article 128)), of] or [burning or setting afire, as arson (article 126), of (a dwelling inhabited by) (a structure or property (known to be occupied by) (belonging to))] a woman;
(b) That the woman was then pregnant; and
(c) That the accused thereby caused bodily injury to the unborn child of that woman.
(2) Killing an unborn child.
(a) That the accused was engaged in the [(murder (article 118)), (voluntary manslaughter (article 119(a))), (involuntary manslaughter (article 119(b)(2))), (rape (article 120)), (robbery (article 122)), (maiming (article 124)), (assault (article 128)), of] or [burning or setting afire, as arson (article 126), of (a dwelling inhabited by) (a structure or property known to (be occupied by) (belong to))] a woman;
(b) That the woman was then pregnant; and
(c) That the accused thereby caused the death of the unborn child of that woman.
(3) Attempting to kill an unborn child. Start Printed Page 20217
(a) That the accused was engaged in the [(murder (article 118)), (voluntary manslaughter (article 119(a))), (involuntary manslaughter (article 119(b)(2))), (rape (article 120)), (robbery (article 122)), (maiming (article 124)), (assault (article 128)), of] or [burning or setting afire, as arson (article 126), of (a dwelling inhabited by) (a structure or property (known to be occupied by) (belonging to))] a woman;
(b) That the woman was then pregnant; and
(c) That the accused thereby intended and attempted to kill the unborn child of that woman.
(4) Intentionally killing an unborn child.
(a) That the accused was engaged in the [(murder (article 118)), (voluntary manslaughter (article 119(a))), (involuntary manslaughter (article 119(b)(2))), (rape (article 120)), (robbery (article 122)), (maiming (article 124)), (assault (article 128)), of] or [burning or setting afire, as arson (article 126), of (a dwelling inhabited by) (a structure or property (known to be occupied by) (belonging to))] a woman;
(b) That the woman was then pregnant; and
(c) That the accused thereby intentionally killed the unborn child of that woman.
c. Explanation.
(1) Nature of offense. This article makes it a separate, punishable crime to cause the death of or bodily injury to an unborn child while engaged in arson (article 126, UCMJ); murder (article 118, UCMJ); voluntary manslaughter (article 119(a), UCMJ); involuntary manslaughter (article 119(b)(2), UCMJ); rape (article 120(a), UCMJ); robbery (article 122, UCMJ); maiming (article 124, UCMJ); or assault (article 128, UCMJ) against a pregnant woman. For all underlying offenses, except arson, this article requires that the victim of the underlying offense be the pregnant mother. For purposes of arson, the pregnant mother must have some nexus to the arson such that she sustained some “bodily injury” due to the arson. For the purposes of this article the term “woman” means a female of any age. This article does not permit the prosecution of any —
(a) person for conduct relating to an abortion for which the consent of the pregnant woman, or a person authorized by law to act on her behalf, has been obtained or for which such consent is implied by law;
(b) person for any medical treatment of the pregnant woman or her unborn child; or
(c) woman with respect to her unborn child.
(2) The offenses of “injuring an unborn child” and “killing an unborn child” do not require proof that —
(a) the person engaging in the conduct (the accused) had knowledge or should have had knowledge that the victim of the underlying offense was pregnant; or
(b) the accused intended to cause the death of, or bodily injury to, the unborn child.
(3) The offense of “attempting to kill an unborn child” requires that the accused intended by his conduct to cause the death of the unborn child (See paragraph b(3)(c) above).
(4) Bodily injury. For the purpose of this offense, the term “bodily injury” is that which is provided by section 1365 of title 18, to wit: a cut, abrasion, bruise, burn, or disfigurement; physical pain; illness; impairment of the function of a bodily member, organ, or mental faculty; or any other injury to the body, no matter how temporary.
(5) Unborn child. “Unborn child” means a child in utero or a member of the species homo sapiens who is carried in the womb, at any stage of development, from conception to birth. Start Printed Page 20218
d. Lesser included offenses.
(1) Killing an unborn child. Article 119a—injuring an unborn child
(2) Intentionally killing an unborn child.
(a) Article 119a—killing an unborn child
(b) Article 119a—injuring an unborn child
(c) Article 119a—attempts (attempting to kill an unborn child)
e. Maximum punishment.
The maximum punishment for (1) Injuring an unborn child; (2) Killing an unborn child; (3) Attempting to kill an unborn child; or (4) Intentionally killing an unborn child is such punishment, other than death, as a court-martial may direct, but shall be consistent with the punishment had the bodily injury, death, attempt to kill, or intentional killing occurred to the unborn child's mother.
f. Sample specifications.
(1) Injuring an unborn child.
In that __________________________(personal jurisdiction data), did (at/on board—location), (subject-matter jurisdiction data, if required), on or about _________ 20___, cause bodily injury to the unborn child of , a pregnant woman, by engaging in the [(murder) (voluntary manslaughter) (involuntary manslaughter) (rape) (robbery) (maiming) (assault) of] [(burning) (setting afire) of (a dwelling inhabited by) (a structure or property known to (be occupied by) (belong to))] that woman.
(2) Killing an unborn child.
In that __________________________(personal jurisdiction data), did (at/on board—location), (subject-matter jurisdiction data, if required), on or about _________ 20___, cause the death of the unborn child of , a pregnant woman, by engaging in the [(murder) (voluntary manslaughter) (involuntary manslaughter) (rape) (robbery) (maiming) (assault) of] [(burning) (setting afire) of (a dwelling inhabited by) (a structure or property known to (be occupied by) (belong to))] that woman.
(3) Attempting to kill an unborn child.
In that __________________________(personal jurisdiction data), did (at/on board—location), (subject-matter jurisdiction data, if required), on or about _________ 20___, attempt to kill the unborn child of , a pregnant woman, by engaging in the [(murder) (voluntary manslaughter) (involuntary manslaughter) (rape) (robbery) (maiming) (assault) of] [(burning) (setting afire) of (a dwelling inhabited by) (a structure or property known to (be occupied by) (belong to))] that woman.
(4) Intentionally killing an unborn child.
In that __________________________(personal jurisdiction data), did (at/on board—location), (subject-matter jurisdiction data, if required), on or about _________ 20___, intentionally kill the unborn child of , a pregnant woman, by engaging in the [(murder) (voluntary manslaughter) (involuntary manslaughter) (rape) (robbery) (maiming) (assault) of] [(burning) (setting afire) of (a dwelling inhabited by) (a structure or property known to (be occupied by) (belong to))] that woman.”
(g) By inserting the new paragraph 45a to read:
“45a. Article 120a Stalking
a. Text
(a) Any person subject to this section: Start Printed Page 20219
(1) who wrongfully engages in a course of conduct directed at a specific person that would cause a reasonable person to fear death or bodily harm, including sexual assault, to himself or herself or a member of his or her immediate family;
(2) who has knowledge, or should have knowledge, that the specific person will be placed in reasonable fear of death or bodily harm, including sexual assault, to himself or herself or a member of his or her immediate family; and
(3) whose acts induce reasonable fear in the specific person of death or bodily harm, including sexual assault, to himself or herself or to a member of his or her immediate family; is guilty of stalking and shall be punished as a court-martial may direct.
(b) In this section:
(1) The term “course of conduct” means:
(A) a repeated maintenance of visual or physical proximity to a specific person; or
(B) a repeated conveyance of verbal threat, written threats, or threats implied by conduct, or a combination of such threats, directed at or towards a specific person.
(2) The term “repeated,” with respect to conduct, means two or more occasions of such conduct.
(3) The term “immediate family,” in the case of a specific person, means a spouse, parent, child, or sibling of the person, or any other family member, relative, or intimate partner of the person who regularly resides in the household of the person or who within the six months preceding the commencement of the course of conduct regularly resided in the household of the person.
b. Elements.
(1) That the accused wrongfully engaged in a course of conduct directed at a specific person that would cause a reasonable person to fear death or bodily harm to himself or herself or a member of his or her immediate family;
(2) That the accused had knowledge, or should have had knowledge, that the specific person would be placed in reasonable fear of death or bodily harm to himself or herself or a member of his or her immediate family; and
(3) That the accused's acts induced reasonable fear in the specific person of death or bodily harm to himself or herself or to a member of his or her immediate family.
c. Explanation. See Paragraph 54.c(1)(a) for an explanation of “bodily harm”.
d. Lesser included offenses. Article 80—attempts.
e. Maximum punishment. Dishonorable discharge, forfeiture of all pay and allowances, and confinement for 3 years.
f. Sample Specification.
In that _____________________(personal jurisdiction data), who (knew)(should have known) that ______ would be placed in reasonable fear of (death)(bodily harm) to (himself) (herself) (______, a member of his or her immediate family) did (at/on board—location), (subject-matter jurisdiction data, if required), (on or about _________ 20___)(from about ______to about ______ 20__), wrongfully engage in a course of conduct directed at ______, to wit: _____________ ________ thereby inducing in ________, a reasonable fear of (death)(bodily harm) to (himself)(herself) (____, a member of his or her immediate family).”
Sec. 3. Part V of the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, is amended as follows: Start Printed Page 20220
(a) Paragraph 5.c.(8) is amended by replacing the word “foreign” with the word “hardship.”
(b) Paragraph 7(e) is amended by replacing the word “Transportation” with the words “Homeland Security”.
Sec. 4. Part IV of the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, is amended by replacing the word “Transportation” with the words “Homeland Security.”
Sec. 5. These amendments shall take effect 30 days from the date of this order.
(a) Nothing in these amendments shall be construed to make punishable any act done or omitted prior to the effective date of this order that was not punishable when done or omitted.
(b) Nothing in these amendments shall be construed to invalidate any nonjudicial punishment proceedings, restraint, investigation, referral of charges, trial in which arraignment occurred, or other action begun prior to the effective date of this order, and any such nonjudicial punishment, restraint, investigation, referral of charges, trial, or other action may proceed in the same manner and with the same effect as if these amendments had not been prescribed.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13431 of May 8, 2007
Establishment of Temporary Organization To Facilitate United States Government Assistance for Transition in Iraq
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 202 of the Revised Statutes (22 U.S.C. 2656) and section 3161 of title 5, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment. There is established within the Department of State, in accordance with section 3161 of title 5, United States Code, a temporary organization to be known as the Iraq Transition Assistance Office (ITAO).
Sec. 2.
Purpose of the Temporary Organization. The purpose of the ITAO shall be to perform the specific project of supporting executive departments and agencies in concluding remaining large infrastructure projects expeditiously in Iraq, in facilitating Iraq's transition to self-sufficiency, and in maintaining an effective diplomatic presence in Iraq.
Sec. 3.
Functions of the Temporary Organization. In carrying out its purpose set forth in section 2, the ITAO shall:
(a) support executive departments and agencies in Iraq in their implementation of United States Government foreign assistance in Iraq;
(b) continue coordination, oversight, and reporting concerning remaining Iraq Relief and Reconstruction Fund (IRRF) monies;
(c) assume the functions assigned to the Iraq Reconstruction Management Office (IRMO) remaining as of the date of this order; and
(d) perform such other functions related to the specific project set forth in section 2 as the Secretary of State (Secretary) may assign.
Sec. 4.
Personnel and Administration. (a) The ITAO shall be headed by a Director selected by the Secretary.
(b) The Secretary shall transfer from the IRMO to the ITAO the personnel, assets, liabilities, and records of the IRMO.
Sec. 5.
General Provisions. (a) This order shall be implemented in accordance with applicable law, subject to the availability of appropriations, and consistent with presidential guidance.
(b) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right, benefit, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
Start Printed Page 26710
(c) The ITAO shall terminate at the end of the maximum period permitted by section 3161(a)(1) of title 5, United States Code, unless sooner terminated by the Secretary.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13432 of May 14, 2007
Cooperation Among Agencies in Protecting the Environment With Respect to Greenhouse Gas Emissions From Motor Vehicles, Nonroad Vehicles, and Nonroad Engines
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. It is the policy of the United States to ensure the coordinated and effective exercise of the authorities of the President and the heads of the Department of Transportation, the Department of Energy, and the Environmental Protection Agency to protect the environment with respect to greenhouse gas emissions from motor vehicles, nonroad vehicles, and nonroad engines, in a manner consistent with sound science, analysis of benefits and costs, public safety, and economic growth.
Sec. 2.
Definitions. As used in this order:
(a) “agencies” refers to the Department of Transportation, the Department of Energy, and the Environmental Protection Agency, and all units thereof, and “agency” refers to any of them;
(b) “alternative fuels” has the meaning specified for that term in section 301(2) of the Energy Policy Act of 1992 (42 U.S.C. 13211(2));
(c) “authorities” include the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401-7671q), the Energy Policy Act of 1992 (Public Law 102-486), the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (Public Law 109-58), the Energy Policy and Conservation Act (Public Law 94-163), and any other current or future laws or regulations that may authorize or require any of the agencies to take regulatory action that directly or indirectly affects emissions of greenhouse gases from motor vehicles;
(d) “greenhouse gases” has the meaning specified for that term in Executive Order 13423 of January 24, 2007;
(e) “motor vehicle” has the meaning specified for that term in section 216(2) of the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7550(2));
(f) “nonroad engine” has the meaning specified for that term in section 216(10) of the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7550(10));
(g) “nonroad vehicle” has the meaning specified for that term in section 216(11) of the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7550(11));
(h) “regulation” has the meaning specified for that term in section 3(d) of Executive Order 12866 of September 30, 1993, as amended (Executive Order 12866); and
(i) “regulatory action” has the meaning specified for that term in section 3(e) of Executive Order 12866.
Sec. 3.
Coordination Among the Agencies. In carrying out the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the head of an agency undertaking a regulatory action that can reasonably be expected to directly regulate emissions, or to substantially and predictably affect emissions, of greenhouse gases from motor vehicles, nonroad vehicles, nonroad engines, or the use of motor vehicle fuels, including alternative fuels, shall:
(a) undertake such a regulatory action, to the maximum extent permitted by law and determined by the head of the agency to be practicable, jointly with the other agencies; Start Printed Page 27718
(b) in undertaking such a regulatory action, consider, in accordance with applicable law, information and recommendations provided by the other agencies;
(c) in undertaking such a regulatory action, exercise authority vested by law in the head of such agency effectively, in a manner consistent with the effective exercise by the heads of the other agencies of the authority vested in them by law; and
(d) obtain, to the extent permitted by law, concurrence or other views from the heads of the other agencies during the development and preparation of the regulatory action and prior to any key decision points during that development and preparation process, and in no event later than 30 days prior to publication of such action.
Sec. 4.
Duties of the Heads of Agencies. (a) To implement this order, the head of each agency shall:
(1) designate appropriate personnel within the agency to (i) direct the agency's implementation of this order, (ii) ensure that the agency keeps the other agencies and the Office of Management and Budget informed of the agency regulatory actions to which section 3 refers, and (iii) coordinate such actions with the agencies;
(2) in coordination as appropriate with the Committee on Climate Change Science and Technology, continue to conduct and share research designed to advance technologies to further the policy set forth in section 1 of this order;
(3) facilitate the sharing of personnel and the sharing of information among the agencies to further the policy set forth in section 1 of this order;
(4) coordinate with the other agencies to avoid duplication of requests to the public for information from the public in the course of undertaking such regulatory action, consistent with the Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.); and
(5) consult with the Secretary of Agriculture whenever a regulatory action will have a significant effect on agriculture related to the production or use of ethanol, biodiesel, or other renewable fuels, including actions undertaken in whole or in part based on authority or requirements in title XV of the Energy Policy Act of 2005, or the amendments made by such title, or when otherwise appropriate or required by law.
(b) To implement this order, the heads of the agencies acting jointly may allocate as appropriate among the agencies administrative responsibilities relating to regulatory actions to which section 3 refers, such as publication of notices in the Federal Register and receipt of comments in response to notices.
Sec. 5.
Duties of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality. (a) The Director of the Office of Management and Budget, with such assistance from the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality as the Director may require, shall monitor the implementation of this order by the heads of the agencies and shall report thereon to the President from time to time, and not less often than semiannually, with any recommendations of the Director for strengthening the implementation of this order.
(b) To implement this order and further the policy set forth in section 1, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget may require the heads of the agencies to submit reports to, and coordinate with, such Office on matters related to this order.
Sec. 6.
General Provisions. (a) This order shall be implemented in accordance with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(b) This order shall not be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, and legislative proposals. Start Printed Page 27719
(c) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right, benefit or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13433 of May 16, 2007
Protecting American Taxpayers From Payment of
Contingency Fees
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 301 of title 3, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. To help ensure the integrity and effective supervision of the legal and expert witness services provided to or on behalf of the United States, it is the policy of the United States that organizations or individuals that provide such services to or on behalf of the United States shall be compensated in amounts that are reasonable, not contingent upon the outcome of litigation or other proceedings, and established according to criteria set in advance of performance of the services, except when otherwise required by law.
Sec. 2.
Duties of Agency Heads. (a) Heads of agencies shall implement within their respective agencies the policy set forth in section 1, consistent with such instructions as the Attorney General may prescribe.
(b) After the date of this order, no agency shall enter into a contingency fee agreement for legal or expert witness services addressed by section 1 of this order, unless the Attorney General has determined that the agency's entry into the agreement is required by law.
(c) Within 90 days after the date of this order, the head of each agency shall notify the Attorney General and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget of any contingency fee agreements for services addressed by section 1 of this order that are in effect as of the date of this order.
Sec. 3.
Definitions. For purposes of this order:
(a) The term “agency” means an executive agency as defined in section 105 of title 5, United States Code, and the United States Postal Service and the Postal Regulatory Commission, but shall exclude the Government Accountability Office and elements of the intelligence community (as defined in section 3(4) of the National Security Act of 1947 as amended (50 U.S.C. 401a(4)).
(b) The term “contingency fee agreement” means a contract or other agreement to provide services under which the amount or the payment of the fee for the services is contingent in whole or in part on the outcome of the matter for which the services were obtained. The term does not include:
(i) qualified tax collection contracts defined in section 6306 of title 26, United States Code, and
(ii) contracts described in sections 3711 and 3718 of title 31, United States Code.
Sec. 4.
General Provisions. (a) This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(b) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(i) authority granted by law to an agency or the head thereof; or
(ii) functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals. Start Printed Page 28442
(c) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right, benefit, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13434 of May 17, 2007
National Security Professional Development
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to enhance the national security, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. In order to enhance the national security of the United States, including preventing, protecting against, responding to, and recovering from natural and manmade disasters, such as acts of terrorism, it is the policy of the United States to promote the education, training, and experience of current and future professionals in national security positions (security professionals) in executive departments and agencies (agencies).
Sec. 2.
National Strategy for Professional Development. Not later than 60 days after the date of this order, the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and Counterterrorism (APHS/CT), in coordination with the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (APNSA), shall submit to the President for approval a National Strategy for the Development of Security Professionals (National Strategy). The National Strategy shall set forth a framework that will provide to security professionals access to integrated education, training, and professional experience opportunities for the purpose of enhancing their mission-related knowledge, skills, and experience and thereby improve their capability to safeguard the security of the Nation. Such opportunities shall be provided across organizations, levels of government, and incident management disciplines, as appropriate.
Sec. 3.
Executive Steering Committee. (a) There is established the Security Professional Development Executive Steering Committee (Steering Committee), which shall facilitate the implementation of the National Strategy. Not later than 120 days after the approval of the National Strategy by the President, the Steering Committee shall submit to the APHS/CT and the APNSA an implementation plan (plan) for the National Strategy, and annually thereafter shall submit to the APHS/CT and the APNSA a status report on the implementation of the plan and any recommendations for changes to the National Strategy.
(b) The Steering Committee shall consist exclusively of the following members (or their designees who shall be full-time officers or employees of the members' respective agencies):
(i) the Director of the Office of Personnel Management, who shall serve as Chair;
(ii) the Secretary of State;
(iii) the Secretary of the Treasury;
(iv) the Secretary of Defense;
(v) the Attorney General;
(vi) the Secretary of Agriculture;
(vii) the Secretary of Labor;
(viii) the Secretary of Health and Human Services;
(ix) the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development;
(x) the Secretary of Transportation;
(xi) the Secretary of Energy; Start Printed Page 28584
(xii) the Secretary of Education;
(xiii) the Secretary of Homeland Security;
(xiv) the Director of National Intelligence;
(xv) the Director of the Office of Management and Budget; and
(xvi) such other officers of the United States as the Chair of the Steering Committee may designate from time to time.
(c) The Steering Committee shall coordinate, to the maximum extent practicable, national security professional development programs and guidance issued by the heads of agencies in order to ensure an integrated approach to such programs.
(d) The Chair of the Steering Committee shall convene and preside at the meetings of the Steering Committee, set its agenda, coordinate its work, and, as appropriate to deal with particular subject matters, establish subcommittees of the Steering Committee that shall consist exclusively of members of the Steering Committee (or their designees under subsection (b) of this section), and such other full-time or permanent part-time officers or employees of the Federal Government as the Chair may designate.
Sec. 4.
Responsibilities. The head of each agency with national security functions shall:
(a) identify and enhance existing national security professional development programs and infrastructure, and establish new programs as necessary, in order to fulfill their respective missions to educate, train, and employ security professionals consistent with the National Strategy and, to the maximum extent practicable, the plan and related guidance from the Steering Committee; and
(b) cooperate with the Steering Committee and provide such information, support, and assistance as the Chair of the Steering Committee may request from time to time.
Sec. 5.
Additional Responsibilities. (a) Except for employees excluded by law, and subject to subsections (b), (c), and (d) of this section, the Director of the Office of Personnel Management, after consultation with the Steering Committee, shall:
(i) consistent with applicable merit-based hiring and advancement principles, lead the establishment of a national security professional development program in accordance with the National Strategy and the plan that provides for interagency and intergovernmental assignments and fellowship opportunities and provides for professional development guidelines for career advancement; and
(ii) issue to agencies rules and guidance or apply existing rules and guidance relating to the establishment of national security professional development programs to implement the National Strategy and the plan;
(b) The Secretary of Defense shall issue rules or guidance on professional development programs for Department of Defense military personnel, including interagency and intergovernmental assignments and fellowship opportunities, to implement the National Strategy and the plan, as appropriate, and shall coordinate such programs, to the maximum extent practicable, with the Steering Committee;
(c) The Secretary of State shall issue rules or guidance on national security professional development programs for the Foreign Service, including interagency and intergovernmental exchanges and fellowship opportunities, to implement the National Strategy and the plan, as appropriate, and shall coordinate such programs, to the maximum extent practicable, with the Steering Committee;
(d) The Director of National Intelligence, in coordination with the heads of agencies of which elements of the intelligence community are a part, shall issue rules or guidance on national security professional development Start Printed Page 28585programs for the intelligence community, including interagency and intergovernmental assignments and fellowship opportunities, to implement the National Strategy and the plan, as appropriate, and shall coordinate such programs, to the maximum extent practicable, with the Steering Committee; and
(e) The Secretary of Homeland Security shall develop a program to provide to Federal, State, local, and tribal government officials education in disaster preparedness, response, and recovery plans and authorities, and training in crisis decision-making skills, consistent with applicable presidential guidance.
Sec. 6.
General Provisions. This order:
(a) shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and authorities of agencies, or heads of agencies, vested by law, and subject to the availability of appropriations;
(b) shall not be construed to impair or otherwise affect the authorities of any agency, instrumentality, officer, or employee of the United States under applicable law, including the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals, or the functions assigned by the President to the Director of the Office of Personnel Management; and
(c) is not intended to, and does not, create any right, benefit, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13435 of June 20, 2007
Expanding Approved Stem Cell Lines in Ethically
Responsible Ways
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to provide leadership with respect to research on pluripotent stem cells derived by ethically responsible techniques so that the potential of pluripotent stem cells can be explored without violating human dignity or demeaning human life, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Research on Alternative Sources of Pluripotent Stem Cells. (a) The Secretary of Health and Human Services (Secretary) shall conduct and support research on the isolation, derivation, production, and testing of stem cells that are capable of producing all or almost all of the cell types of the developing body and may result in improved understanding of or treatments for diseases and other adverse health conditions, but are derived without creating a human embryo for research purposes or destroying, discarding, or subjecting to harm a human embryo or fetus.
(b) Within 90 days of this order, the Secretary, after such consultation with the Director of the National Institutes of Health (Director), shall issue a plan, including such mechanisms as requests for proposals, requests for applications, program announcements and other appropriate means, to implement subsection (a) of this section, that:
(i) specifies and reflects a determination of the extent to which specific techniques may require additional basic or animal research to ensure that any research involving human cells using these techniques is clearly consistent with the standards established under this order and applicable law;
(ii) prioritizes research with the greatest potential for clinical benefit;
(iii) takes into account techniques outlined by the President's Council on Bioethics, and any other appropriate techniques and research, provided they clearly meet the standard set forth in subsection (a) of this section;
(iv) renames the “Human Embryonic Stem Cell Registry” the “Human Pluripotent Stem Cell Registry;” and
(v) adds to the registry new human pluripotent stem cell lines that clearly meet the standard set forth in subsection (a) of this section.
(c) Not later than December 31 of each year, the Secretary shall report to the President on the activities carried out under this order during the past fiscal year, including a description of the research carried out or supported by the Department of Health and Human Services, including the National Institutes of Health, and other developments in the science of pluripotent stem cells not derived from human embryos.
Sec. 2.
Policy. The activities undertaken and supported by and under the direction of the Secretary shall be clearly consistent with the following policies and principles:
(a) the purposes of this order are (i) to direct the Department of Health and Human Services, including the National Institutes of Health, to intensify peer reviewed research that may result in improved understanding of or treatments for diseases and other adverse health conditions, and (ii) to promote the derivation of human pluripotent stem cell lines from a variety Start Printed Page 34592of alternative sources while clearly meeting the standard set forth in section 1(a) of this order;
(b) it is critical to establish moral and ethical boundaries to allow the Nation to move forward vigorously with medical research, while also maintaining the highest ethical standards and respecting human life and human dignity;
(c) the destruction of nascent life for research violates the principle that no life should be used as a mere means for achieving the medical benefit of another;
(d) human embryos and fetuses, as living members of the human species, are not raw materials to be exploited or commodities to be bought and sold; and
(e) the Federal Government has a duty to exercise responsible stewardship of taxpayer funds, both supporting important medical research and respecting ethical and moral boundaries.
Sec. 3.
Interpretation of this Order. (a) For purposes of this order, the term “human embryo” shall mean any organism, not protected as a human subject under 45 CFR 46 as of the date of this order, that is derived by fertilization, parthenogenesis, cloning, or any other means from one or more human gametes or human diploid cells.
(b) For purposes of this order, the term “subjecting to harm a human embryo” shall mean subjecting such an embryo to risk of injury or death greater than that allowed for research on fetuses in utero under 45 CFR 46.204(b) and section 498(b) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 289g(b)) as of the date of this order.
(c) Nothing in this order shall be construed to affect any policy, guideline, or regulation regarding embryonic stem cell research, human cloning by somatic cell nuclear transfer, or any other research not specifically authorized by this order, or to forbid the use of existing stem cell lines deemed eligible for other federally funded research in accordance with the presidential policy decision of August 9, 2001, for research specifically authorized by this order.
Sec. 4.
General Provisions. (a) This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
Start Printed Page 34593
(b) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right, benefit, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13436 of June 28, 2007
Further Amending Executive Order 13381, as Amended, To Extend Its Duration by One Year
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to extend by 1 year the duration of Executive Order 13381 of June 27, 2005 (Strengthening Processes Relating to Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified National Security Information), as amended, it is hereby ordered that:
Section 1. Section 6(a) of Executive Order 13381, as amended, is further amended by striking “April 1, 2007” and inserting in lieu thereof “April 1, 2008”.
Sec. 2. Section 6(b) of Executive Order 13381, as amended, is further amended by striking “July 1, 2007” and inserting in lieu thereof “July 1, 2008”.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13437 of June 28, 2007
Waiver Under the Trade Act of 1974 With Respect to Turkmenistan
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including sections 402(c)(2) and (d) of the Trade Act of 1974, as amended (the “Act”)(19 U.S.C. 2432(c)(2) and (d)), and having made the report to the Congress set forth in section 402(c)(2), I hereby waive the application of subsections (a) and (b) of section 402 of the Act with respect to Turkmenistan.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13438 of July 17, 2007
Blocking Property of Certain Persons Who Threaten
Stabilization Efforts in Iraq
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, as amended (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.)(IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.)(NEA), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, find that, due to the unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States posed by acts of violence threatening the peace and stability of Iraq and undermining efforts to promote economic reconstruction and political reform in Iraq and to provide humanitarian assistance to the Iraqi people, it is in the interests of the United States to take additional steps with respect to the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13303 of May 22, 2003, and expanded in Executive Order 13315 of August 28, 2003, and relied upon for additional steps taken in Executive Order 13350 of July 29, 2004, and Executive Order 13364 of November 29, 2004. I hereby order:
Section 1. (a) Except to the extent provided in section 203(b)(1), (3), and (4) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(1), (3), and (4)), or in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the date of this order, all property and interests in property of the following persons, that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of United States persons, are blocked and may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in: any person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense,
(i) to have committed, or to pose a significant risk of committing, an act or acts of violence that have the purpose or effect of:
(A) threatening the peace or stability of Iraq or the Government of Iraq; or
(B) undermining efforts to promote economic reconstruction and political reform in Iraq or to provide humanitarian assistance to the Iraqi people;
(ii) to have materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, logistical, or technical support for, or goods or services in support of, such an act or acts of violence or any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order; or
(iii) to be owned or controlled by, or to have acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order.
(b) The prohibitions in subsection (a) of this section include, but are not limited to, (i) the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order, and (ii) the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.Start Printed Page 39720
Sec. 2. (a) Any transaction by a United States person or within the United States that evades or avoids, has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
(b) Any conspiracy formed to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
Sec. 3. For purposes of this order:
(a) the term “person” means an individual or entity;
(b) the term “entity” means a partnership, association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization; and
(c) the term “United States person” means any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States.
Sec. 4. I hereby determine that the making of donations of the type specified in section 203(b)(2) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)) by, to, or for the benefit of, any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order would seriously impair my ability to deal with the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13303 and expanded in Executive Order 13315, and I hereby prohibit such donations as provided by section 1 of this order.
Sec. 5. For those persons whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order who might have a constitutional presence in the United States, I find that, because of the ability to transfer funds or other assets instantaneously, prior notice to such persons of measures to be taken pursuant to this order would render these measures ineffectual. I therefore determine that for these measures to be effective in addressing the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13303 and expanded in Executive Order 13315, there need be no prior notice of a listing or determination made pursuant to section 1(a) of this order.
Sec. 6. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government, consistent with applicable law. All agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order and, where appropriate, to advise the Secretary of the Treasury in a timely manner of the measures taken.
Sec. 7. Nothing in this order is intended to affect the continued effectiveness of any rules, regulations, orders, licenses, or other forms of administrative action issued, taken, or continued in effect heretofore or hereafter under 31 C.F.R. chapter V, except as expressly terminated, modified, or suspended by or pursuant to this order.
Start Printed Page 39721
Sec. 8. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right, benefit, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13439 of July 18, 2007
Establishing an Interagency Working Group on Import Safety
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to ensure that the executive branch takes all appropriate steps to promote the safety of imported products, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment of Interagency Working Group on Import Safety. The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall establish within the Department of Health and Human Services for administrative purposes only an Interagency Working Group on Import Safety (Working Group).
Sec. 2.
Membership and Operation of Working Group.
(a) The Working Group shall consist exclusively of the following members, or their designees who shall be officers of the United States appointed by the President or members of the Senior Executive Service:
(i) the Secretary of Health and Human Services, who shall serve as Chair;
(ii) the Secretary of State;
(iii) the Secretary of the Treasury;
(iv) the Attorney General;
(v) the Secretary of Agriculture;
(vi) the Secretary of Commerce;
(vii) the Secretary of Transportation;
(viii) the Secretary of Homeland Security;
(ix) the Director of the Office of Management and Budget;
(x) the United States Trade Representative;
(xi) the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency;
(xii) the Chairman of the Consumer Product Safety Commission; and
(xiii) other officers or full-time or permanent part-time employees of the United States, as determined by the Chair, with the concurrence of the head of the department or agency concerned.
(b) The Chair shall convene and preside at meetings of the Working Group, determine its agenda, and direct its work. The Chair may establish and direct subgroups of the Working Group, as appropriate to deal with particular subject matters, that shall consist exclusively of members of the Working Group. The Chair shall designate an officer or employee of the Department of Health and Human Services to serve as the Executive Secretary of the Working Group. The Executive Secretary shall head any staff assigned to the Working Group and any subgroups thereof, and such staff shall consist exclusively of full-time or permanent part-time Federal employees.
Sec. 3.
Mission of Working Group. The mission of the Working Group shall be to identify actions and appropriate steps that can be pursued, within existing resources, to promote the safety of imported products, including the following:
(a) reviewing or assessing current procedures and methods aimed at ensuring the safety of products exported to the United States, including reviewing existing cooperation with foreign governments, foreign manufacturers, and Start Printed Page 40054others in the exporting country's private sector regarding their inspection and certification of exported goods and factories producing exported goods and considering whether additional initiatives should be undertaken with respect to exporting countries or companies;
(b) identifying potential means to promote all appropriate steps by U.S. importers to enhance the safety of imported products, including identifying best practices by U.S. importers in selection of foreign manufacturers, inspecting manufacturing facilities, inspecting goods produced on their behalf either before export or before distribution in the United States, identifying origin of products, and safeguarding the supply chain; and
(c) surveying authorities and practices of Federal, State, and local government agencies regarding the safety of imports to identify best practices and enhance coordination among agencies.
Sec. 4.
Administration of Working Group. The Chair shall, to the extent permitted by law, provide administrative support and funding for the Working Group.
Sec. 5.
Recommendations of Working Group. The Working Group shall provide recommendations to the President, through the Assistant to the President for Economic Policy, on the matters set forth in section 3 within 60 days of the date of this order, unless the Chair determines that an extension is necessary. The Working Group may take other actions it considers appropriate to promote the safety of imported products.
Sec. 6.
Termination of Working Group. Following consultation with the Assistant to the President for Economic Policy, the Chair shall terminate the Working Group upon the completion of its duties.
Sec. 7.
General Provisions.
(a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect (i) authority granted by law to a department, agency, or the head thereof, or (ii) functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(b) This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
Start Printed Page 40055
(c) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right, benefit, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13440 of July 20, 2007
Interpretation of the Geneva Conventions Common Article 3 as Applied to a Program of Detention and Interrogation Operated by the Central Intelligence Agency
By the authority vested in me as President and Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Authorization for Use of Military Force (Public Law 107-40), the Military Commissions Act of 2006 (Public Law 109-366), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
General Determinations. (a) The United States is engaged in an armed conflict with al Qaeda, the Taliban, and associated forces. Members of al Qaeda were responsible for the attacks on the United States of September 11, 2001, and for many other terrorist attacks, including against the United States, its personnel, and its allies throughout the world. These forces continue to fight the United States and its allies in Afghanistan, Iraq, and elsewhere, and they continue to plan additional acts of terror throughout the world. On February 7, 2002, I determined for the United States that members of al Qaeda, the Taliban, and associated forces are unlawful enemy combatants who are not entitled to the protections that the Third Geneva Convention provides to prisoners of war. I hereby reaffirm that determination.
(b) The Military Commissions Act defines certain prohibitions of Common Article 3 for United States law, and it reaffirms and reinforces the authority of the President to interpret the meaning and application of the Geneva Conventions.
Sec. 2.
Definitions. As used in this order:
(a) “Common Article 3” means Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions.
(b) “Geneva Conventions” means:
(i) the Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field, done at Geneva August 12, 1949 (6 UST 3114);
(ii) the Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea, done at Geneva August 12, 1949 (6 UST 3217);
(iii) the Convention Relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War, done at Geneva August 12, 1949 (6 UST 3316); and
(iv) the Convention Relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, done at Geneva August 12, 1949 (6 UST 3516).
(c) “Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment” means the cruel, unusual, and inhumane treatment or punishment prohibited by the Fifth, Eighth, and Fourteenth Amendments to the Constitution of the United States.
Sec. 3.
Compliance of a Central Intelligence Agency Detention and Interrogation Program with Common Article 3. (a) Pursuant to the authority of the President under the Constitution and the laws of the United States, including the Military Commissions Act of 2006, this order interprets the meaning and application of the text of Common Article 3 with respect to certain detentions and interrogations, and shall be treated as authoritative for all Start Printed Page 40708purposes as a matter of United States law, including satisfaction of the international obligations of the United States. I hereby determine that Common Article 3 shall apply to a program of detention and interrogation operated by the Central Intelligence Agency as set forth in this section. The requirements set forth in this section shall be applied with respect to detainees in such program without adverse distinction as to their race, color, religion or faith, sex, birth, or wealth.
(b) I hereby determine that a program of detention and interrogation approved by the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency fully complies with the obligations of the United States under Common Article 3, provided that:
(i) the conditions of confinement and interrogation practices of the program do not include:
(A) torture, as defined in section 2340 of title 18, United States Code;
(B) any of the acts prohibited by section 2441(d) of title 18, United States Code, including murder, torture, cruel or inhuman treatment, mutilation or maiming, intentionally causing serious bodily injury, rape, sexual assault or abuse, taking of hostages, or performing of biological experiments;
(C) other acts of violence serious enough to be considered comparable to murder, torture, mutilation, and cruel or inhuman treatment, as defined in section 2441(d) of title 18, United States Code;
(D) any other acts of cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment prohibited by the Military Commissions Act (subsection 6(c) of Public Law 109-366) and the Detainee Treatment Act of 2005 (section 1003 of Public Law 109-148 and section 1403 of Public Law 109-163);
(E) willful and outrageous acts of personal abuse done for the purpose of humiliating or degrading the individual in a manner so serious that any reasonable person, considering the circumstances, would deem the acts to be beyond the bounds of human decency, such as sexual or sexually indecent acts undertaken for the purpose of humiliation, forcing the individual to perform sexual acts or to pose sexually, threatening the individual with sexual mutilation, or using the individual as a human shield; or
(F) acts intended to denigrate the religion, religious practices, or religious objects of the individual;
(ii) the conditions of confinement and interrogation practices are to be used with an alien detainee who is determined by the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency:
(A) to be a member or part of or supporting al Qaeda, the Taliban, or associated organizations; and
(B) likely to be in possession of information that:
(1) could assist in detecting, mitigating, or preventing terrorist attacks, such as attacks within the United States or against its Armed Forces or other personnel, citizens, or facilities, or against allies or other countries cooperating in the war on terror with the United States, or their armed forces or other personnel, citizens, or facilities; or
(2) could assist in locating the senior leadership of al Qaeda, the Taliban, or associated forces;
(iii) the interrogation practices are determined by the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, based upon professional advice, to be safe for use with each detainee with whom they are used; and
(iv) detainees in the program receive the basic necessities of life, including adequate food and water, shelter from the elements, necessary clothing, protection from extremes of heat and cold, and essential medical care.
(c) The Director of the Central Intelligence Agency shall issue written policies to govern the program, including guidelines for Central Intelligence Agency personnel that implement paragraphs (i)(C), (E), and (F) of subsection 3(b) of this order, and including requirements to ensure: Start Printed Page 40709
(i) safe and professional operation of the program;
(ii) the development of an approved plan of interrogation tailored for each detainee in the program to be interrogated, consistent with subsection 3(b)(iv) of this order;
(iii) appropriate training for interrogators and all personnel operating the program;
(iv) effective monitoring of the program, including with respect to medical matters, to ensure the safety of those in the program; and
(v) compliance with applicable law and this order.
Sec. 4.
Assignment of Function. With respect to the program addressed in this order, the function of the President under section 6(c)(3) of the Military Commissions Act of 2006 is assigned to the Director of National Intelligence.
Sec. 5.
General Provisions. (a) Subject to subsection (b) of this section, this order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, against the United States, its departments, agencies, or other entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
(b) Nothing in this order shall be construed to prevent or limit reliance upon this order in a civil, criminal, or administrative proceeding, or otherwise, by the Central Intelligence Agency or by any individual acting on behalf of the Central Intelligence Agency in connection with the program addressed in this order.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13441 of August 1, 2007
Blocking Property of Persons Undermining the Sovereignty of Lebanon or Its Democratic Processes and Institutions
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.)(IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.)(NEA), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, determine that the actions of certain persons to undermine Lebanon's legitimate and democratically elected government or democratic institutions, to contribute to the deliberate breakdown in the rule of law in Lebanon, including through politically motivated violence and intimidation, to reassert Syrian control or contribute to Syrian interference in Lebanon, or to infringe upon or undermine Lebanese sovereignty contribute to political and economic instability in that country and the region and constitute an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States, and I hereby declare a national emergency to deal with that threat. I hereby order:
Section 1. (a) Except to the extent provided in section 203(b)(1), (3), and (4) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(1), (3), and (4)), or in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the date of this order, all property and interests in property that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of any United States person, including any overseas branch, of the following persons are blocked and may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in:
(i) any person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State:
(A) to have taken, or to pose a significant risk of taking, actions, including acts of violence, that have the purpose or effect of undermining Lebanon's democratic processes or institutions, contributing to the breakdown of the rule of law in Lebanon, supporting the reassertion of Syrian control or otherwise contributing to Syrian interference in Lebanon, or infringing upon or undermining Lebanese sovereignty;
(B) to have materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services in support of, such actions, including acts of violence, or any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order;
(C) to be a spouse or dependent child of any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order; or
(D) to be owned or controlled by, or acting or purporting to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order.
(b) I hereby determine that the making of donations of the type of articles specified in section 203(b)(2) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)) by, to, or for the benefit of any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section would seriously impair Start Printed Page 43500my ability to deal with the national emergency declared in this order, and I hereby prohibit such donations as provided by paragraph (a) of this section.
(c)The prohibitions in paragraph (a) of this section include but are not limited to (i) the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order, and (ii) the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.
Sec. 2. (a) Any transaction by a United States person or within the United States that evades or avoids, has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
(b) Any conspiracy formed to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
Sec. 3. For the purposes of this order:
(a) the term “person” means an individual or entity;
(b) the term “entity” means a partnership, association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization; and
(c) the term “United States person” means any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States.
Sec. 4. For those persons whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order who might have a constitutional presence in the United States, I find that, because of the ability to transfer funds or other assets instantaneously, prior notice to such persons of measures to be taken pursuant to this order would render these measures ineffectual. I therefore determine that, for these measures to be effective in addressing the national emergency declared in this order, there need be no prior notice of a listing or determination made pursuant to section 1 of this order.
Sec. 5. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA, as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government, consistent with applicable law. All agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order and, where appropriate, to advise the Secretary of the Treasury in a timely manner of the measures taken. The Secretary of the Treasury shall ensure compliance with those provisions of section 401 of the NEA (50 U.S.C. 1641) applicable to the Department of the Treasury in relation to this order.
Sec. 6. The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to submit the recurring and final reports to the Congress on the national emergency declared in this order, consistent with section 401(c) of the NEA (50 U.S.C. 1641(c)) and section 204(c) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1703(c)).
Start Printed Page 43501
Sec. 7. This order is not intended to create, nor does it create, any right, benefit, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13442 of August 13, 2007
Amending the Order of Succession in the Department of Homeland Security
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, 5 U.S.C. 3345, et seq., it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Section 88 of Executive Order 13286 of February 28, 2003 (“Amendment of Executive Orders, and Other Actions, in Connection With the Transfer of Certain Functions to the Secretary of Homeland Security”), is amended by striking the text of such section in its entirety and inserting the following in lieu thereof:
“Sec. 88. Order of Succession.
Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, the officers named in subsection (a) of this section, in the order listed, shall act as, and perform the functions and duties of the office of, the Secretary of Homeland Security (Secretary), if they are eligible to act as Secretary under the provisions of the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, 5 U.S.C. 3345 et seq. (Vacancies Act), during any period in which the Secretary has died, resigned, or otherwise become unable to perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary.
(a) Order of Succession.
”(i) Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security;
(ii) Under Secretary for National Protection and Programs;
(iii) Under Secretary for Management;
(iv) Assistant Secretary of Homeland Security (Policy);
(v) Under Secretary for Science and Technology;
(vi) General Counsel;
(vii) Assistant Secretary of Homeland Security (Transportation Security Administration);
(viii) Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
(ix) Commissioner of U.S. Customs and Border Protection;
(x) Assistant Secretary of Homeland Security (U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement);
(xi) Director of U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services;
(xii) Chief Financial Officer;
(xiii) Regional Administrator, Region V, Federal Emergency Management Agency;
(xiv) Regional Administrator, Region VI, Federal Emergency Management Agency;
(xv) Regional Administrator, Region VII, Federal Emergency Management Agency;
(xvi) Regional Administrator, Region IX, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and
(xvii) Regional Administrator, Region I, Federal Emergency Management Agency. Start Printed Page 45878
“(b) Exceptions.
(i) No individual who is serving in an office listed in subsection (a) in an acting capacity, by virtue of so serving, shall act as Secretary pursuant to this section.
(ii) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the President retains discretion, to the extent permitted by the Vacancies Act, to depart from this order in designating an acting Secretary.”
Sec. 2. Executive Order 13362 of November 29, 2004 (“Designation of Additional Officers for the Department of Homeland Security Order of Succession”), is hereby revoked.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13443 of August 16, 2007
Facilitation of Hunting Heritage and Wildlife Conservation
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Purpose. The purpose of this order is to direct Federal agencies that have programs and activities that have a measurable effect on public land management, outdoor recreation, and wildlife management, including the Department of the Interior and the Department of Agriculture, to facilitate the expansion and enhancement of hunting opportunities and the management of game species and their habitat.
Sec. 2.
Federal Activities. Federal agencies shall, consistent with agency missions:
(a) Evaluate the effect of agency actions on trends in hunting participation and, where appropriate to address declining trends, implement actions that expand and enhance hunting opportunities for the public;
(b) Consider the economic and recreational values of hunting in agency actions, as appropriate;
(c) Manage wildlife and wildlife habitats on public lands in a manner that expands and enhances hunting opportunities, including through the use of hunting in wildlife management planning;
(d) Work collaboratively with State governments to manage and conserve game species and their habitats in a manner that respects private property rights and State management authority over wildlife resources;
(e) Establish short and long term goals, in cooperation with State and tribal governments, and consistent with agency missions, to foster healthy and productive populations of game species and appropriate opportunities for the public to hunt those species;
(f) Ensure that agency plans and actions consider programs and recommendations of comprehensive planning efforts such as State Wildlife Action Plans, the North American Waterfowl Management Plan, and other range-wide management plans for big game and upland game birds;
(g) Seek the advice of State and tribal fish and wildlife agencies, and, as appropriate, consult with the Sporting Conservation Council and other organizations, with respect to the foregoing Federal activities.
Sec. 3.
North American Wildlife Policy Conference. The Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Chairman) shall, in coordination with the appropriate Federal agencies and in consultation with the Sporting Conservation Council and in cooperation with State and tribal fish and wildlife agencies and the public, convene not later than 1 year after the date of this order, and periodically thereafter at such times as the Chairman deems appropriate, a White House Conference on North American Wildlife Policy (Conference) to facilitate the exchange of information and advice relating to the means for achieving the goals of this order.
Sec. 4.
Recreational Hunting and Wildlife Resource Conservation Plan. The Chairman shall prepare, consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations, in coordination with the appropriate Federal agencies and in consultation with the Sporting Conservation Council, and in cooperation with State and tribal fish and wildlife agencies, not later Start Printed Page 46538than 1 year following the conclusion of the Conference, a comprehensive Recreational Hunting and Wildlife Conservation Plan that incorporates existing and ongoing activities and sets forth a 10-year agenda for fulfilling the actions identified in section 2 of this order.
Sec. 5.
Judicial Review. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right, benefit, trust responsibility, or privilege, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13444 of September 12, 2007
Extending Privileges and Immunities to the African Union Mission to the United States
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 7(a)(2) of the Department of State Authorities Act of 2006 (Public Law 109-472), I hereby extend to the African Union Mission to the United States of America, and to its members, the privileges and immunities enjoyed by diplomatic missions accredited to the United States, and by members of such missions, subject to corresponding conditions and obligations.
This extension of privileges and immunities is not intended to abridge in any respect privileges and immunities that the African Union Mission to the United States of America and its members otherwise may have acquired or may acquire by law.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13445 of September 27, 2007
Strengthening Adult Education
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. It is the policy of the United States to use existing Federal programs that serve adults, including new Americans, to strengthen literacy skills, improve opportunities for postsecondary education and employment, and facilitate participation in American life.
Sec. 2.
Definitions. As used in this order:
(a) “agency” means an executive agency as defined in section 105 of title 5, United States Code, other than the Government Accountability Office; and
(b) “adult education” means teaching or instruction below the postsecondary level, for individuals who are 16 years of age or older, designed to provide:
(i) mastery of basic education skills needed to function effectively in society;
(ii) a secondary school diploma or its equivalent; or
(iii) the ability to speak, read, or write the English language.
Sec. 3.
Establishment of Interagency Adult Education Working Group. The Secretary of Education shall establish within the Department of Education for administrative purposes only, an Interagency Adult Education Working Group (Working Group), consistent with this order.
Sec. 4.
Membership and Operation of the Working Group.
(a) The Working Group shall consist exclusively of:
(i) the Secretary of Education, who shall serve as Chair;
(ii) the Secretary of the Treasury, the Attorney General, and the Secretaries of the Interior, Labor, Health and Human Services, Housing and Urban Development, and Veterans Affairs; and
(iii) other officers or full-time or permanent part-time employees of the United States, as determined by the Chair, with the concurrence of the head of the agency concerned.
(b) The Chair, or the Chair's designee under subsection (c) of this section, in implementing section 5 of this order, shall convene and preside at the meetings of the Working Group, determine its agenda, direct its work, and establish and direct subgroups of the Working Group, as appropriate to deal with particular subject matters, that shall consist exclusively of members of the Working Group or their designees under subsection (c) of this section.
(c) A member of the Working Group may designate, to perform the Working Group or Working Group subgroup functions of the member, any person who is a part of the member's agency and who is either an officer of the United States appointed by the President or a member of the Senior Executive Service.
Sec. 5.
Functions of the Working Group. Consistent with the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the Working Group shall:
(a) identify Federal programs that: Start Printed Page 56166
(i) focus primarily on improving the basic education skills of adults;
(ii) have the goal of transitioning adults from basic literacy to postsecondary education, training, or employment; or
(iii) constitute programs of adult education;
(b) as appropriate, review the programs identified under subsection (a) of this section and submit to the heads of the agencies administering those programs recommendations to:
(i) promote the transition of adults from such programs to postsecondary education, training, or employment;
(ii) increase the effectiveness, efficiency, and availability of such programs;
(iii) minimize unnecessary duplication among such programs;
(iv) measure and evaluate the performance of such programs; and
(v) undertake and disseminate the results of research related to such programs;
(c) identify gaps in the research about effective ways to teach adult education for postsecondary readiness, recommend areas for further research to improve adult education programs and services, and identify promising practices in disseminating valid existing and future research findings; and
(d) obtain information and advice as appropriate, in a manner that seeks individual advice and does not involve collective judgment or consensus advice or deliberation, concerning adult education from:
(i) State, local, territorial, and tribal officials; and
(ii) representatives of entities or other individuals;
(e) at the request of the head of an agency, unless the Chair declines the request, promptly review and provide advice on a proposed action by that agency relating to adult education; and
(f) report to the President, through the Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy, on its work, and on the implementation of any recommendations arising from its work, at such times and in such formats as the Chair may specify, with the first such report to be submitted no later than 9 months after the date of this order.
Sec. 6.
Administration of the Working Group. (a) To the extent permitted by law, the Department of Education shall provide the funding and administrative support the Working Group needs, as determined by the Chair, to implement this order.
(b) The heads of agencies shall provide, as appropriate, such assistance and information as the Chair may request to implement this order.
Sec. 7.
General Provisions. (a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(i) authority granted by law to an agency or the head thereof; or
(ii) functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(b) This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
Start Printed Page 56167
(c) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its agencies or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 56175
Executive Order 13446 of September 28, 2007
Continuance of Certain Federal Advisory Committees and Amendments to and Revocation of Other Executive Orders
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and consistent with the provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.), it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Each advisory committee listed below is continued until September 30, 2009.
(a) Committee for the Preservation of the White House; Executive Order 11145, as amended (Department of the Interior).
(b) National Infrastructure Advisory Council; section 3 of Executive Order 13231, as amended (Department of Homeland Security).
(c) Federal Advisory Council on Occupational Safety and Health; Executive Order 12196, as amended (Department of Labor).
(d) President's Board of Advisors on Historically Black Colleges and Universities; Executive Order 13256 (Department of Education).
(e) President's Board of Advisors on Tribal Colleges and Universities; Executive Order 13270 (Department of Education).
(f) President's Commission on White House Fellowships; Executive Order 11183, as amended (Office of Personnel Management).
(g) President's Committee for People with Intellectual Disabilities; Executive Order 12994, as amended (Department of Health and Human Services).
(h) President's Committee on the Arts and the Humanities; Executive Order 12367, as amended (National Endowment for the Arts).
(i) President's Committee on the International Labor Organization; Executive Order 12216, as amended (Department of Labor).
(j) President's Committee on the National Medal of Science; Executive Order 11287, as amended (National Science Foundation).
(k) President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology; Executive Order 13226, as amended (Office of Science and Technology Policy).
(l) President's Council on Bioethics; Executive Order 13237 (Department of Health and Human Services).
(m) President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports; Executive Order 13265 (Department of Health and Human Services).
(n) President's Export Council; Executive Order 12131, as amended (Department of Commerce).
(o) President's National Security Telecommunications Advisory Committee; Executive Order 12382, as amended (Department of Homeland Security).
(p) Trade and Environment Policy Advisory Committee; Executive Order 12905 (Office of the United States Trade Representative).
Sec. 2. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other Executive Order, the functions of the President under the Federal Advisory Committee Act that are applicable to the committees listed in section 1 of this order shall be performed by the head of the department or agency designated after Start Printed Page 56176each committee, in accordance with the guidelines and procedures established by the Administrator of General Services.
Sec. 3. The following Executive Order, which established a committee whose work has been completed, is revoked: Executive Order 13369, as amended by Executive Orders 13379 and 13386, establishing the President's Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform.
Sec. 4. Sections 1 and 2 of Executive Order 13385 are superseded by sections 1 and 2 of this order.
Sec. 5. Executive Order 12994, as amended (President's Committee for People with Intellectual Disabilities) is further amended to read as follows:
“By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to promote full participation of people with intellectual disabilities in their communities, it is hereby ordered as follows:
“Section 1.
Committee Continued and Responsibilities Expanded. The President's Committee on Mental Retardation, with expanded membership and expanded responsibilities, and renamed the President's Committee for People with Intellectual Disabilities (Committee), is hereby continued in operation.
“Sec. 2.
Composition of Committee. (a) The Committee shall be composed of the following members:
(1) The Attorney General;
(2) The Secretary of the Interior;
(3) The Secretary of Commerce;
(4) The Secretary of Labor;
(5) The Secretary of Health and Human Services;
(6) The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development;
(7) The Secretary of Transportation;
(8) The Secretary of Education;
(9) The Secretary of Homeland Security;
(10) The Chief Executive Officer of the Corporation for National and Community Service;
(11) The Commissioner of Social Security;
(12) The Chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission;
(13) The Chairperson of the National Council on Disability; and
(14) No more than 21 other members who shall be appointed to the Committee by the President. These citizen members shall consist of individuals who represent a broad spectrum of perspectives, experience, and expertise on intellectual disabilities; persons with intellectual disabilities and members of families with a child or adult with intellectual disabilities; and persons employed in either the public or the private sector. Except as the President may from time to time otherwise direct, appointees under this paragraph shall serve for two-year terms, except that an appointment made to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of a term shall be made for the balance of the unexpired term.
“(b) The President shall designate the Chair of the Committee from the 21 citizen members. The Chair shall preside over meetings of the Committee and represent the Committee on appropriate occasions.
“Sec. 3.
Functions of the Committee. (a) Consistent with subsection (c) of this section, the Committee shall:
(1) provide such advice concerning intellectual disabilities as the President or the Secretary of Health and Human Services may request; and
(2) provide advice to the President concerning the following for people with intellectual disabilities:
(A) expansion of educational opportunities;
(B) promotion of homeownership;
(C) assurance of workplace integration;
(D) improvement of transportation options; Start Printed Page 56177
(E) expansion of full access to community living; and
(F) increasing access to assistive and universally designed technologies.
“(b) The Committee shall provide an annual report to the President through the Secretary of Health and Human Services. Such additional reports may be made as the President may direct or as the Committee may deem appropriate.
“(c) The members shall advise the President and carry out their advisory role consistent with the requirements of the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.).
“Sec. 4.
Cooperation by Agencies. The heads of Federal departments and agencies shall:
“(a) designate, when requested by the Secretary of Health and Human Services, an officer or employee of such department or agency to serve as a liaison with the Committee; and
“(b) furnish such information and assistance to the Committee, to the extent permitted by law, as the Secretary of Health and Human Services may request to assist the Committee in performing its functions under this order.
“Sec. 5.
Administration. (a) The Department of Health and Human Services shall provide the Committee with necessary staff support, administrative services and facilities, and funding, to the extent permitted by law.
“(b) Each member of the Committee, except any member who receives other compensation from the United States Government, may receive compensation for each day engaged in the work of the Committee, as authorized by law (5 U.S.C. 3109), and may also receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707), for persons employed intermittently in the Government service. Committee members with disabilities may be compensated for attendant expenses, consistent with Government procedures and practices.
“(c) The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall perform such other functions with respect to the Committee as may be required by the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.), except that of reporting to the Congress.
“Sec. 6.
General. (a) Nothing in this order shall be construed as subjecting any Federal agency, or any function vested by law in, or assigned pursuant to law to, any Federal agency, to the authority of the Committee or as abrogating or restricting any such function in any manner. Start Printed Page 56178
“(b) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.”.
Sec. 6. This order shall be effective September 30, 2007.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 56179
Executive Order 13447 of September 28, 2007
Further 2007 Amendments to the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including chapter 47 of title 10, United States Code (Uniform Code of Military Justice, 10 U.S.C. 801-946), and in order to prescribe amendments to the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, prescribed by Executive Order 12473, as amended, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. The second subparagraph of paragraph 4, of Part I, of the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, as amended by section 2 of Executive Order 13262 of April 11, 2002, is amended by striking the third sentence.
Sec. 2. Parts II, III, and IV of the Manual for Courts- Martial, United States, are amended as described in the Annex attached and made a part of this order.
Sec. 3. These amendments shall take effect on October 1, 2007.
(a) Nothing in these amendments shall be construed to make punishable any act done or omitted prior to October 1, 2007, that was not punishable when done or omitted.
(b) Nothing in these amendments shall be construed to invalidate any nonjudicial punishment proceedings, restraint, investigation, referral of charges, trial in which arraignment occurred, or other action begun prior to October 1, 2007, and any such nonjudicial punishment, restraint, investigation, referral of charges, trial, or other action may proceed in the same manner and with the same effect as if these amendments had not been prescribed.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
September 28, 2007.
Start Printed Page 56180
Start Printed Page 56181
Start Printed Page 56182
Start Printed Page 56183
Start Printed Page 56184
Start Printed Page 56185
Start Printed Page 56186
Start Printed Page 56187
Start Printed Page 56188
Start Printed Page 56189
Start Printed Page 56190
Start Printed Page 56191
Start Printed Page 56192
Start Printed Page 56193
Start Printed Page 56194
Start Printed Page 56195
Start Printed Page 56196
Start Printed Page 56197
Start Printed Page 56198
Start Printed Page 56199
Start Printed Page 56200
Start Printed Page 56201
Start Printed Page 56202
Start Printed Page 56203
Start Printed Page 56204
Start Printed Page 56205
Start Printed Page 56206
Start Printed Page 56207
Start Printed Page 56208
Start Printed Page 56209
Start Printed Page 56210
Start Printed Page 56211
Start Printed Page 56212
Start Printed Page 56213
Start Printed Page 56214
Start Printed Page 56215
Start Printed Page 56216
Start Printed Page 56217
Start Printed Page 56218
Start Printed Page 56219
Start Printed Page 56220
Start Printed Page 56221
Start Printed Page 56222
Start Printed Page 56223
Start Printed Page 56224
Start Printed Page 56225
Start Printed Page 56226
Start Printed Page 56227
Start Printed Page 56228
Start Printed Page 56229
Start Printed Page 56230
Start Printed Page 56231
Start Printed Page 56232
Start Printed Page 56233
Start Printed Page 56234
Start Printed Page 56235
Start Printed Page 56236
Start Printed Page 56237
Start Printed Page 56238
Start Printed Page 56239
Executive Order 13448 of October 18, 2007
Blocking Property and Prohibiting Certain Transactions
Related to Burma
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.), the Burmese Freedom and Democracy Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-61, as amended, 50 U.S.C. 1701 note), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and in order to take additional steps with respect to the Government of Burma's continued repression of the democratic opposition in Burma,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, hereby expand the scope of the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13047 of May 20, 1997, and relied upon for additional steps taken in Executive Order 13310 of July 28, 2003, finding that the Government of Burma's continued repression of the democratic opposition in Burma, manifested most recently in the violent response to peaceful demonstrations, the commission of human rights abuses related to political repression, and engagement in public corruption, including by diverting or misusing Burmese public assets or by misusing public authority, constitute an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States, and I hereby order:
Section 1. Except to the extent provided in section 203(b)(1), (3), and (4) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(1), (3), and (4)), the Trade Sanctions Reform and Export Enhancement Act of 2000 (title IX, Public Law 106-387), or regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date of this order, all property and interests in property of the following persons that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of United States persons, including their overseas branches, are blocked and may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in:
(a) the persons listed in the Annex attached and made a part of this order; and
(b) any person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State:
(i) to be a senior official of the Government of Burma, the State Peace and Development Council of Burma, the Union Solidarity and Development Association of Burma, or any successor entity to any of the foregoing;
(ii) to be responsible for, or to have participated in, human rights abuses related to political repression in Burma;
(iii) to be engaged, or to have engaged, in activities facilitating public corruption by senior officials of the Government of Burma;
Start Printed Page 60224
(iv) to have materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, logistical, or technical support for, or goods or services in support of, the Government of Burma, the State Peace and Development Council of Burma, the Union Solidarity and Development Association of Burma, any successor entity to any of the foregoing, any senior official of any of the foregoing, or any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to Executive Order 13310 or section 1(b)(i)-(v) of this order;
(v) to be owned or controlled by, or to have acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to Executive Order 13310 or section 1(b)(i)-(v) of this order; or
(vi) to be a spouse or dependent child of any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order or Executive Order 13310.
Sec. 2. (a) Any transaction by a United States person or within the United States that evades or avoids, has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
(b) Any conspiracy formed to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
Sec. 3. For purposes of this order:
(a) the term “person” means an individual or entity;
(b) the term “entity” means a partnership, association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization;
(c) the term “United States person” means any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States; and
(d) the term “Government of Burma” means the Government of Burma (sometimes referred to as Myanmar), its agencies, instrumentalities and controlled entities, and the Central Bank of Burma.
Sec. 4. I hereby determine that the making of donations of the type specified in section 203(b)(2) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)) by, to, or for the benefit of, persons whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to section 1 of this order would seriously impair my ability to deal with the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13047, and relied upon for additional steps taken in Executive Order 13310, and expanded in this order, and hereby prohibit such donations as provided by section 1 of this order.
Sec. 5. For those persons whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to section 1 of this order who might have a constitutional presence in the United States, I find that because of the ability to transfer funds or other assets instantaneously, prior notice to such persons of measures to be taken pursuant to this order would render these measures ineffectual. I therefore determine that for these measures to be effective in addressing the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13047, and relied upon for additional steps taken in Executive Order 13310, and expanded in this order, there need be no prior notice of a listing or determination made pursuant to this order.
Start Printed Page 60225
Sec. 6. The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA and section 4 of the Burmese Freedom and Democracy Act of 2003 as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government consistent with applicable law. All agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order.
Sec. 7. The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, is authorized to determine, subsequent to the effective date of this order, that circumstances no longer warrant inclusion of a person in the Annex to this order and that the property and interests in property of that person are therefore no longer blocked pursuant to section 1 of this order.
Sec. 8. Nothing in this order is intended to affect the continued effectiveness of any rules, regulations, orders, licenses, or other forms of administrative action issued, taken, or continued in effect heretofore or hereafter under 31 C.F.R. chapter V, except as expressly terminated, modified, or suspended by or pursuant to this order.
Sec. 9. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
Sec. 10. This order is effective at 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time on October 19, 2007.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
October 18, 2007.
Start Printed Page 60226
Start Printed Page 60531
Executive Order 13449 of October 20, 2007
Protection of Striped Bass and Red Drum Fish Populations
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, to assist in ensuring faithful execution of the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act, the Atlantic Coastal Fisheries Cooperative Management Act, and the Atlantic Striped Bass Conservation Act (chapters 38, 71, and 71A of title 16, United States Code), and to conserve striped bass and red drum fish, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. It shall be the policy of the United States to conserve striped bass and red drum for the recreational, economic, and environmental benefit of the present and future generations of Americans, based on sound science and in cooperation with State, territorial, local, and tribal governments, the private sector, and others, as appropriate.
Sec. 2.
Implementation. (a) To carry out the policy set forth in section 1, the Secretary of Commerce shall:
(i) encourage, as appropriate, management under Federal, State, territorial, tribal, and local laws that supports the policy of conserving striped bass and red drum, including State designation as gamefish where the State determines appropriate under applicable law;
(ii) revise current regulations, as appropriate, to include prohibiting the sale of striped bass and red drum caught within the Exclusive Economic Zone of the United States off the Atlantic Ocean and the Gulf of Mexico;
(iii) periodically review the status of the striped bass and red drum populations within waters subject to the jurisdiction of the United States and:
(A) take such actions within the authority of the Secretary of Commerce as may be appropriate to carry out the policy set forth in section 1 of this order; and
(B) recommend to the President such actions as the Secretary may deem appropriate to advance the policy set forth in section 1 that are not within the authority of the Secretary.
(b) Nothing in this order shall preclude or restrict the production, possession, or sale of striped bass or red drum fish that have been produced by aquaculture.
(c) The Secretary of Commerce shall implement subsections 2(a)(i) and (iii), insofar as they relate to Atlantic striped bass, jointly with the Secretary of the Interior, as appropriate.
Sec. 3.
Definitions. As used in this order:
(a) “Exclusive Economic Zone of the United States” means the marine area of the United States as defined in Presidential Proclamation 5030 of March 10, 1983, with, for purposes of this order, the inner boundary of that zone being a line coterminous with the seaward boundary of each of the coastal States;
(b) “red drum” means the species Sciaenops ocellatus; and
(c) “striped bass” means the species Morone saxatilis.
Start Printed Page 60532
Sec. 4.
General Provisions. (a) This order shall be implemented in a manner consistent with applicable law (including but not limited to interstate compacts to which the United States has consented by law, treaties and other international agreements to which the United States is a party, treaties to which the United States and an Indian tribe are parties, and laws of the United States conferring rights on Indian tribes) and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(b) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, and legislative proposals.
(c) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, entities, officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13450 of November 13, 2007
Improving Government Program Performance
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including sections 305 and 306 of title 5, sections 1115, 1116, and 9703 of title 31, and chapter 28 of title 39, United States Code, and to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the Federal Government and promote greater accountability of that Government to the American people, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. It is the policy of the Federal Government to spend taxpayer dollars effectively, and more effectively each year. Agencies shall apply taxpayer resources efficiently in a manner that maximizes the effectiveness of Government programs in serving the American people.
Sec. 2.
Definitions. As used in this order:
(a) “agency” means:
(i) an executive agency as defined in section 105 of title 5, United States Code, other than the Government Accountability Office; and
(ii) the United States Postal Service and the Postal Regulatory Commission;
(b) “agency Performance Improvement Officer” means an employee of an agency who is a member of the Senior Executive Service or equivalent service, and who is designated by the head of the agency to carry out the duties set forth in section 5 of this order.
Sec. 3.
Duties of Heads of Agencies. To assist in implementing the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the head of each agency shall, with respect to each program administered in whole or in part by the agency:
(a) approve for implementation:
(i) clear annual and long-term goals defined by objectively measurable outcomes; and
(ii) specific plans for achieving the goals, including:
(A) assignments to specified agency personnel of:
(1) the duties necessary to achieve the goals; and
(2) the authority and resources necessary to fulfill such duties;
(B) means to measure:
(1) progress toward achievement of the goals; and
(2) efficiency in use of resources in making that progress; and
(C) mechanisms for ensuring continuous accountability of the specified agency personnel to the head of the agency for achievement of the goals and efficiency in use of resources in achievement of the goals;
(b) assist the President, through the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (Director), in making recommendations to the Congress, including budget and appropriations recommendations, that are justified based on objective performance information and accurate estimates of the full costs of achieving the annual and long-term goals approved under subsection (a)(i) of this section; and
(c) ensure that agency Internet websites available to the public include regularly updated and accurate information on the performance of the agency and its programs, in a readily useable and searchable form, that sets forth the successes, shortfalls, and challenges of each program and describes the agency's efforts to improve the performance of the program.Start Printed Page 64520
Sec. 4.
Additional Duties of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget. (a) To assist in implementing the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the Director shall issue instructions to the heads of agencies concerning:
(i) the contents, and schedule for approval, of the goals and plans required by section 3 of this order; and
(ii) the availability to the public in readily accessible and comprehensible form on the agency's Internet website (or in the Federal Register for any agency that does not have such a website), of the information approved by the head of each agency under section 3 of this order and other information relating to agency performance.
(b) Instructions issued under subsection (a) of this section shall facilitate compliance with applicable law, presidential guidance, and Office of Management and Budget circulars and shall be designed to minimize duplication of effort and to assist in maximizing the efficiency and effectiveness of agencies and their programs.
Sec. 5.
Duties of Agency Performance Improvement Officers. Subject to the direction of the head of the agency, each agency Performance Improvement Officer shall:
(a) supervise the performance management activities of the agency, including:
(i) development of the goals, specific plans, and estimates for which section 3 of this order provides; and
(ii) development of the agency's strategic plans, annual performance plans, and annual performance reports as required by law;
(b) advise the head of the agency, with respect to a program administered in whole or in part by the agency, whether:
(i) goals proposed for the approval of the head of the agency under section 3(a)(i) of this order are:
(A) sufficiently aggressive toward full achievement of the purposes of the program; and
(B) realistic in light of authority and resources assigned to the specified agency personnel referred to in section 3(a)(ii)(A) of this order with respect to that program; and
(ii) means for measurement of progress toward achievement of the goals are sufficiently rigorous and accurate;
(c) convene the specified agency personnel referred to in section 3(a)(ii)(A) of this order, or appropriate subgroups thereof, regularly throughout each year to:
(i) assess performance of each program administered in whole or in part by the agency; and
(ii) consider means to improve the performance and efficiency of such program;
(d) assist the head of the agency in the development and use within the agency of performance measures in personnel performance appraisals, and, as appropriate, other agency personnel and planning processes; and
(e) report to the head of the agency on the implementation within the agency of the policy set forth in section 1 of this order.
Sec. 6.
Establishment and Operation of Performance Improvement Council. (a) The Director shall establish, within the Office of Management and Budget for administrative purposes only, a Performance Improvement Council (Council), consistent with this order.
(b) The Council shall consist exclusively of:
(i) the Deputy Director for Management of the Office of Management and Budget, who shall serve as Chair; Start Printed Page 64521
(ii) such agency Performance Improvement Officers, as determined by the Chair; and
(iii) such other full-time or permanent part-time employees of an agency, as determined by the Chair with the concurrence of the head of the agency concerned.
(c) The Chair or the Chair's designee, in implementing subsection (d) of this section, shall convene and preside at the meetings of the Council, determine its agenda, direct its work, and establish and direct subgroups of the Council, as appropriate to deal with particular subject matters, that shall consist exclusively of members of the Council.
(d) To assist in implementing the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the Council shall:
(i) develop and submit to the Director, or when appropriate to the President through the Director, at times and in such formats as the Chair may specify, recommendations concerning:
(A) performance management policies and requirements; and
(B) criteria for evaluation of program performance;
(ii) facilitate the exchange among agencies of information on performance management, including strategic and annual planning and reporting, to accelerate improvements in program performance;
(iii) coordinate and monitor a continuous review by heads of agencies of the performance and management of all Federal programs that assesses the clarity of purpose, quality of strategic and performance planning and goals, management excellence, and results achieved for each agency's programs, with the results of these assessments and the evidence on which they are based made available to the public on or through the Internet website referred to in subsection (d)(iv);
(iv) to facilitate keeping the public informed, and with such assistance of heads of agencies as the Director may require, develop an Internet website that provides the public with information on how well each agency performs and that serves as a comprehensive source of information on:
(A) current program performance; and
(B) the status of program performance plans and agency Performance and Accountability Reports; and
(C) consistent with the direction of the head of the agency concerned after consultation with the Director, any publicly available reports by the agency's Inspector General concerning agency program performance;
(v) monitor implementation by agencies of the policy set forth in section 1 of this order and report thereon from time to time as appropriate to the Director, or when appropriate to the President through the Director, at such times and in such formats as the Chair may specify, together with any recommendations of the Council for more effective implementation of such policy;
(vi) at the request of the head of an agency, unless the Chair declines the request, promptly review and provide advice on a proposed action by that agency to implement the policy set forth in section 1 of this order; and
(vii) obtain information and advice, as appropriate, in a manner that seeks individual advice and does not involve collective judgment or consensus advice or deliberation, from:
(A) State, local, territorial, and tribal officials; and
(B) representatives of entities or other individuals.
(e)(i) To the extent permitted by law, the Office of Management and Budget shall provide the funding and administrative support the Council needs, as determined by the Director, to implement this section; and Start Printed Page 64522
(ii) the heads of agencies shall provide, as appropriate and to the extent permitted by law, such information and assistance as the Chair may request to implement this section.
Sec. 7.
General Provisions. (a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(i) authority granted by law to an agency or the head thereof; or
(ii) functions of the Director relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(b) This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law (including laws and executive orders relating to the protection of information from disclosure) and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(c) In implementing this order, the Director of National Intelligence shall perform the functions assigned to the Director of National Intelligence by the National Security Act of 1947, as amended (50 U.S.C. 401 et seq.), consistent with section 1018 of the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act (Public Law 108-458), and other applicable laws.
(d) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 65653
Executive Order 13451 of November 19, 2007
Designating the ITER International Fusion Energy Organization as a Public International Organization Entitled To Enjoy Certain Privileges, Exemptions, and Immunities
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 1 of the International Organizations Immunities Act (22 U.S.C. 288), and finding that the United States participates in the ITER International Fusion Energy Organization under the authority of acts of Congress authorizing such participation and making an appropriation for such participation, including sections 971 and 972 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (42 U.S.C. 16311 and 16312) and laws making appropriations for the Department of Energy, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Designation. I hereby designate the ITER International Fusion Energy Organization as a public international organization entitled to enjoy the privileges, exemptions, and immunities provided by the International Organizations Immunities Act.
Sec. 2.
Non-Abridgement. This designation is not intended to abridge in any respect privileges, exemptions, or immunities that the ITER International Fusion Energy Organization otherwise may have acquired or may acquire by law.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13452 of November 28, 2007
Establishing an Emergency Board To Investigate Disputes Between the National Railroad Passenger Corporation and Certain of Its Employees Represented by Certain Labor Organizations
Disputes exist between National Railroad Passenger Corporation (Amtrak) and certain of its employees represented by certain labor organizations. The labor organizations involved in these disputes are designated on the attached list, which is made a part of this order.
The disputes have not heretofore been adjusted under the provisions of the Railway Labor Act, as amended (45 U.S.C. 151 et seq.) (RLA).
In the judgment of the National Mediation Board, these disputes threaten substantially to interrupt interstate commerce to a degree that would deprive sections of the country of essential transportation service.
NOW, THEREFORE, by the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, including section 10 of the RLA (45 U.S.C. 160), it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment of Emergency Board (Board). There is established, effective 12:01 a.m. eastern standard time on December 1, 2007, a Board of five members to be appointed by the President to investigate and report on these disputes. No member shall be pecuniarily or otherwise interested in any organization of railroad employees or any carrier. The Board shall perform its functions subject to the availability of funds.
Sec. 2.
Report. The Board shall report to the President with respect to the disputes within 30 days of its creation.
Sec. 3.
Maintaining Conditions. As provided by section 10 of the RLA, from the date of the creation of the Board and for 30 days after the Board has submitted its report to the President, no change in the conditions out of which the disputes arose shall be made by the parties to the controversy, except by agreement of the parties.
Sec. 4.
Records Maintenance. The records and files of the Board are records of the Office of the President and upon the Board's termination shall be maintained in the physical custody of the National Mediation Board.
Start Printed Page 67828
Sec. 5.
Expiration. The Board shall terminate upon the submission of the report provided for in section 2 of this order.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
November 28, 2007.
Start Printed Page 67829
LABOR ORGANIZATIONS
Brotherhood of Maintenance of Way Employes
International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers
International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers
Brotherhood of Railroad Signalmen
Joint Council of Carmen, comprised of the Transportation Communications International Union/Brotherhood Railway Carmen Division and the Transport Workers Union of America
American Train Dispatchers Association
National Conference of Firemen & Oilers/Service Employees International Union
Transportation Communications International Union—American Railway and Airline Supervisors Association
Executive Order 13453 of December 6, 2007
Closing of Executive Departments and Agencies of the
Federal Government on Monday, December 24, 2007
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. All executive branch departments and agencies of the Federal Government shall be closed and their employees excused from duty on Monday, December 24, 2007, the day before Christmas Day, except as provided in section 2 below.
Sec. 2. The heads of executive branch departments and agencies may determine that certain offices and installations of their organizations, or parts thereof, must remain open and that certain employees must report for duty on December 24, 2007, for reasons of national security or defense or other public need.
Sec. 3. Monday, December 24, 2007, shall be considered as falling within the scope of Executive Order 11582 of February 11, 1971, and of 5 U.S.C. 5546 and 6103(b) and other similar statutes insofar as they relate to the pay and leave of employees of the United States.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13454 of January 4, 2008
Adjustments of Certain Rates of Pay
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the laws cited herein, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Statutory Pay Systems. The rates of basic pay or salaries of the statutory pay systems (as defined in 5 U.S.C. 5302(1)), as adjusted under 5 U.S.C. 5303(a), are set forth on the schedules attached hereto and made a part hereof:
(a) The General Schedule (5 U.S.C. 5332(a)) at Schedule 1;
(b) The Foreign Service Schedule (22 U.S.C. 3963) at Schedule 2; and
(c) The schedules for the Veterans Health Administration of the Department of Veterans Affairs (38 U.S.C. 7306, 7404; section 301(a) of Public Law 102-40) at Schedule 3.
Sec. 2.
Senior Executive Service. The ranges of rates of basic pay for senior executives in the Senior Executive Service, as established pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 5382, are set forth on Schedule 4 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 3.
Certain Executive, Legislative and Judicial Salaries. The rates of basic pay or salaries for the following offices and positions are set forth on the schedules attached hereto and made a part hereof:
(a) The Executive Schedule (5 U.S.C. 5312-5318) at Schedule 5;
(b) The Vice President (3 U.S.C. 104) and the Congress (2 U.S.C. 31) at Schedule 6; and
(c) Justices and judges (28 U.S.C. 5, 44(d), 135, 252, and 461(a), section 140 of Public Law 97-92, and section 305 of Division D of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2008), at Schedule 7.
Sec. 4.
Uniformed Services. The rates of monthly basic pay (37 U.S.C. 203(a)) for members of the uniformed services, as adjusted under 37 U.S.C. 1009, and the rate of monthly cadet or midshipman pay (37 U.S.C. 203(c)) are set forth on Schedule 8 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 5.
Locality-Based Comparability Payments.
(a) Pursuant to section 5304 of title 5, United States Code, and section 740 of Division D of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2008, locality-based comparability payments shall be paid in accordance with Schedule 9 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
(b) The Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall take such actions as may be necessary to implement these payments and to publish appropriate notice of such payments in the Federal Register.
Sec. 6.
Administrative Law Judges. The rates of basic pay for administrative law judges, as adjusted under 5 U.S.C. 5372(b)(4), are set forth on Schedule 10 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Start Printed Page 1482
Sec. 7.
Effective Dates. Schedule 8 is effective on January 1, 2008. The other schedules contained herein are effective on the first day of the first applicable pay period beginning on or after January 1, 2008.
Sec. 8.
Prior Order Superseded. Executive Order 13420 of December 21, 2006, is superseded.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
January 4, 2008.
Start Printed Page 1483
Start Printed Page 1484
Start Printed Page 1485
Start Printed Page 1486
Start Printed Page 1487
Start Printed Page 1488
Start Printed Page 1489
Start Printed Page 1490
Start Printed Page 1491
Start Printed Page 1492
Executive Order 13455 of January 22, 2008
Establishing the President's Advisory Council on Financial Literacy
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America and to promote and enhance financial literacy among the American people, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. To help keep America competitive and assist the American people in understanding and addressing financial matters, it is the policy of the Federal Government to encourage financial literacy among the American people.
Sec. 2.
Establishment of the Council. There is established within the Department of the Treasury the President's Advisory Council on Financial Literacy (Council).
Sec. 3.
Membership and Operation of the Council. (a) The Council shall consist of 19 members appointed by the President from among individuals not employed by the Federal Government, consistent with subsection (b) of this section.
(b) In selecting individuals for appointment to the Council, appropriate consideration should be given to selection of individuals with backgrounds as providers of, consumers of, promoters of access to, and educators with respect to financial education and financial services. Each individual member of the Council will serve as a representative of his or her industry, trade group, public interest group, or other organization or group. The composition of the Council will reflect the views of diverse stakeholders.
(c) The President shall designate a Chair and a Vice Chair from among the members of the Council.
(d) Subject to the direction of the Secretary of the Treasury (Secretary), the Chair shall convene and preside at meetings of the Council, determine its agenda, direct its work, and, as appropriate to deal with particular subject matters, establish and direct the work of subgroups of the Council that shall consist exclusively of members of the Council.
(e) The Vice Chair shall perform:
(i) the duties of the Chair when the position of Chair is vacant; and
(ii) such other functions as the Chair may from time to time assign.
Sec. 4.
Functions of the Council. To assist in implementing the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the Council shall:
(a) obtain information and advice concerning financial literacy as appropriate in the course of its work from:
(i) officers and employees of executive departments and agencies (including members of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission), unless otherwise directed by the head of the department or agency;
(ii) State, local, territorial, and tribal officials;
(iii) providers of, consumers of, promoters of access to, and educators with respect to financial services;
(iv) experts on matters relating to the policy set forth in section 1; and
(v) such other individuals as the Secretary may direct; Start Printed Page 4446
(b) advise the President and the Secretary consistent with this order on means to implement effectively the policy set forth in section 1, including by providing advice on means to:
(i) improve financial education efforts for youth in school and for adults in the workplace;
(ii) promote effective access to financial services, especially for those without access to such services;
(iii) establish effective measures of national financial literacy;
(iv) conduct research on financial knowledge, including the collection of data on the extent of financial knowledge of individuals; and
(v) strengthen and coordinate public and private sector financial education programs; and
(c) periodically report to the President, through the Secretary, on:
(i) the status of financial literacy in the United States;
(ii) progress made in implementing the policy set forth in section 1 of this order; and
(iii) recommendations on means to further implement the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, including with respect to the matters set forth in subsection (b)(i) through (v) of this section.
Sec. 5.
Administration of the Council. (a) To the extent permitted by law, the Department of the Treasury shall provide funding and administrative support for the Council, as determined by the Secretary, to implement this order.
(b) The heads of executive departments and agencies shall provide, as appropriate and to the extent permitted by law, such assistance and information to the Council as the Secretary may request to implement this order.
(c) Members of the Council:
(i) shall serve without any compensation for their work on the Council; and
(ii) while engaged in the work of the Council, may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in the Government (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707), consistent with the availability of funds.
(d) The Secretary shall designate an officer or employee of the United States within the Department of the Treasury to serve as an Executive Director to supervise the administrative support for the Council.
Sec. 6.
Termination of the Council. Unless extended by the President, the Council shall terminate 2 years from the date of this order.
Sec. 7.
General Provisions. (a) Insofar as the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.) (Act), may apply to the Council, any functions of the President under the Act, except for those in section 6 of the Act, shall be performed by the Secretary in accordance with the guidelines issued by the Administrator of General Services.
(b) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(i) authority granted by law to a department or agency or the head thereof; or
(ii) functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(c) This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
Start Printed Page 4447
(d) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13456 of January 23, 2008
Further Amendment of Executive Order 11858 Concerning Foreign Investment in the United States
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 721 of the Defense Production Act of 1950, as amended (50 U.S.C. App. 2170), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Amendment to Executive Order 11858. Executive Order 11858 of May 7, 1975, as amended, is further amended to read as follows:
“FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN THE UNITED STATES
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 721 of the Defense Production Act of 1950, as amended (50 U.S.C. App. 2170), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. International investment in the United States promotes economic growth, productivity, competitiveness, and job creation. It is the policy of the United States to support unequivocally such investment, consistent with the protection of the national security.
Sec. 2.
Definitions. (a) The “Act” as used in this order means section 721 of the Defense Production Act of 1950, as amended.
(b) Terms used in this order that are defined in subsection 721(a) of the Act shall have the same meaning in this order as they have in such subsection.
(c) “Risk mitigation measure” as used in this order means any provision of a risk mitigation agreement or a condition to which section 7 of this order refers.
Sec. 3.
Establishment. (a) There is hereby established the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (the “Committee”) as provided in the Act.
(b) In addition to the members specified in the Act, the following heads of departments, agencies, or offices shall be members of the Committee:
(i) The United States Trade Representative;
(ii) The Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy; and
(iii) The heads of any other executive department, agency, or office, as the President or the Secretary of the Treasury determines appropriate, on a case-by-case basis.
(c) The following officials (or their designees) shall observe and, as appropriate, participate in and report to the President on the Committee's activities:
(i) The Director of the Office of Management and Budget;
(ii) The Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers;
(iii) The Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs;
(iv) The Assistant to the President for Economic Policy; and
(v) The Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and Counterterrorism. Start Printed Page 4678
Sec. 4.
Duties of the Secretary of the Treasury.
(a) The functions of the President under subsections (b)(1)(A) (relating to review and consideration after notification), (b)(1)(D) (relating to unilateral initiation of review and consideration), and (m)(3)(A) (relating to inclusion in annual report and designation) of the Act are assigned to the Secretary of the Treasury.
(b) The Secretary of the Treasury shall perform the function of issuance of regulations under section 721(h) of the Act. The Secretary shall consult the Committee with respect to such regulations prior to any notice and comment and prior to their issuance.
(c) Except as otherwise provided in the Act or this order, the chairperson shall have the authority, exclusive of the heads of departments or agencies, after consultation with the Committee:
(i) to act, or authorize others to act, on behalf of the Committee; and
(ii) to communicate on behalf of the Committee with the Congress and the public.
(d) The chairperson shall coordinate the preparation of and transmit the annual report to the Congress provided for in the Act and may assign to any member of the Committee, as the chairperson determines appropriate and consistent with the Act, responsibility for conducting studies and providing analyses necessary for the preparation of the report.
(e) After consultation with the Committee, the chairperson may request that the Director of National Intelligence begin preparing the analysis required by the Act at any time, including prior to acceptance of the notice of a transaction, in accordance with otherwise applicable law. The Director of National Intelligence shall provide the Director's analysis as soon as possible and consistent with section 721(b)(4) of the Act.
Sec. 5.
Lead Agency. (a) The lead agency or agencies (“lead agency”) shall have primary responsibility, on behalf of the Committee, for the specific activity for which the Secretary of the Treasury designates it a lead agency.
(b) In acting on behalf of the Committee, the lead agency shall keep the Committee fully informed of its activities. In addition, the lead agency shall notify the chairperson of any material action that the lead agency proposes to take on behalf of the Committee, sufficiently in advance to allow adequate time for the chairperson to consult the Committee and provide the Committee's direction to the lead agency not to take, or to amend, such action.
Sec. 6.
Reviews and Investigations.
(a) Any member of the Committee may conduct its own inquiry with respect to the potential national security risk posed by a transaction, but communication with the parties to a transaction shall occur through or in the presence of the lead agency, or the chairperson if no lead agency has been designated.
(b) The Committee shall undertake an investigation of a transaction in any case, in addition to the circumstances described in the Act, in which following a review a member of the Committee advises the chairperson that the member believes that the transaction threatens to impair the national security of the United States and that the threat has not been mitigated.
(c) The Committee shall send a report to the President requesting the President's decision with respect to a review or investigation of a transaction in the following circumstances:
(i) the Committee recommends that the President suspend or prohibit the transaction; Start Printed Page 4679
(ii) the Committee is unable to reach a decision on whether to recommend that the President suspend or prohibit the transaction; or
(iii) the Committee requests that the President make a determination with regard to the transaction.
(d) Upon completion of a review or investigation of a transaction, the lead agency shall prepare for the approval of the chairperson the appropriate certified notice or report to the Congress called for under the Act. The chairperson shall transmit such notice or report to the Congress, as appropriate.
Sec. 7.
Risk Mitigation. (a) The Committee, or any lead agency acting on behalf of the Committee, may seek to mitigate any national security risk posed by a transaction that is not adequately addressed by other provisions of law by entering into a mitigation agreement with the parties to a transaction or by imposing conditions on such parties.
(b) Prior to the Committee or a department or agency proposing risk mitigation measures to the parties to a transaction, the department or agency seeking to propose any such measure shall prepare and provide to the Committee a written statement that: (1) identifies the national security risk posed by the transaction based on factors including the threat (taking into account the Director of National Intelligence's threat analysis), vulnerabilities, and potential consequences; and (2) sets forth the risk mitigation measures the department or agency believes are reasonably necessary to address the risk. If the Committee agrees that mitigation is appropriate and approves the risk mitigation measures, the lead agency shall seek to negotiate such measures with the parties to the transaction.
(c) A risk mitigation measure shall not, except in extraordinary circumstances, require that a party to a transaction recognize, state its intent to comply with, or consent to the exercise of any authorities under existing provisions of law.
(d) The lead agency designated for the purpose of monitoring a risk mitigation measure shall seek to ensure that adequate resources are available for such monitoring. When designating a lead agency for those purposes, the Secretary of the Treasury shall consider the agency's views on the adequacy of its resources for such purposes.
(e)(i) Nothing in this order shall be construed to limit the ability of a department or agency, in the exercise of authorities other than those provided under the Act, to:
(A) conduct inquiries with respect to a transaction;
(B) communicate with the parties to a transaction; or
(C) negotiate, enter into, impose, or enforce contractual provisions with the parties to a transaction.
(ii) A department or agency shall not condition actions or the exercise of authorities to which paragraph (i) of this subsection refers upon the exercise, or forbearance in the exercise, of its authority under the Act or this order, and no authority under the Act shall be available for the enforcement of such actions or authorities.
(f) The Committee may initiate a review of a transaction that has previously been reviewed by the Committee only in the extraordinary circumstances provided in the Act.
Sec. 8.
Additional Assignments to the Committee. In addition to the functions assigned to the Committee by the Act, the Committee shall review the implementation of the Act and this order and report thereon from time to time to the President, together with such recommendations for policy, administrative, or legislative proposals as the Committee determines appropriate.
Sec. 9.
Duties of the Secretary of Commerce. The Secretary of Commerce shall: Start Printed Page 4680
(a) obtain, consolidate, and analyze information on foreign investment in the United States;
(b) monitor and, where necessary, improve procedures for the collection and dissemination of information on foreign investment in the United States;
(c) prepare for the public, the President or heads of departments or agencies, as appropriate, reports, analyses of trends, and analyses of significant developments in appropriate categories of foreign investment in the United States; and
(d) compile and evaluate data on significant transactions involving foreign investment in the United States.
Sec. 10.
General Provisions. (a) The heads of departments and agencies shall provide, as appropriate and to the extent permitted by law, such information and assistance as the Committee may request to implement the Act and this order.
(b) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(i) authority granted by law to a department or agency or the head thereof;
(ii) functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals; or
(iii) existing mitigation agreements.
(c) This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(d) Officers of the United States with authority or duties under the Act or this order shall ensure that, in carrying out the Act and this order, the actions of departments, agencies, and the Committee are consistent with the President's constitutional authority to: (i) conduct the foreign affairs of the United States; (ii) withhold information the disclosure of which could impair the foreign relations, the national security, the deliberative processes of the Executive, or the performance of the Executive's constitutional duties; (iii) recommend for congressional consideration such measures as the President may judge necessary and expedient; and (iv) supervise the unitary executive branch.
Sec. 11.
Revocation. Section 801 of Executive Order 12919 of June 3, 1994, is revoked.”
Start Printed Page 4681
Sec. 2.
General Provision. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13457 of January 29, 2008
Protecting American Taxpayers From Government Spending on Wasteful Earmarks
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. It is the policy of the Federal Government to be judicious in the expenditure of taxpayer dollars. To ensure the proper use of taxpayer funds that are appropriated for Government programs and purposes, it is necessary that the number and cost of earmarks be reduced, that their origin and purposes be transparent, and that they be included in the text of the bills voted upon by the Congress and presented to the President. For appropriations laws and other legislation enacted after the date of this order, executive agencies should not commit, obligate, or expend funds on the basis of earmarks included in any non-statutory source, including requests in reports of committees of the Congress or other congressional documents, or communications from or on behalf of Members of Congress, or any other non-statutory source, except when required by law or when an agency has itself determined a project, program, activity, grant, or other transaction to have merit under statutory criteria or other merit-based decisionmaking.
Sec. 2.
Duties of Agency Heads. (a) With respect to all appropriations laws and other legislation enacted after the date of this order, the head of each agency shall take all necessary steps to ensure that:
(i) agency decisions to commit, obligate, or expend funds for any earmark are based on the text of laws, and in particular, are not based on language in any report of a committee of Congress, joint explanatory statement of a committee of conference of the Congress, statement of managers concerning a bill in the Congress, or any other non-statutory statement or indication of views of the Congress, or a House, committee, Member, officer, or staff thereof;
(ii) agency decisions to commit, obligate, or expend funds for any earmark are based on authorized, transparent, statutory criteria and merit-based decision making, in the manner set forth in section II of OMB Memorandum M-07-10, dated February 15, 2007, to the extent consistent with applicable law; and
(iii) no oral or written communications concerning earmarks shall supersede statutory criteria, competitive awards, or merit-based decisionmaking.
(b) An agency shall not consider the views of a House, committee, Member, officer, or staff of the Congress with respect to commitments, obligations, or expenditures to carry out any earmark unless such views are in writing, to facilitate consideration in accordance with section 2(a)(ii) above. All written communications from the Congress, or a House, committee, Member, officer, or staff thereof, recommending that funds be committed, obligated, or expended on any earmark shall be made publicly available on the Internet by the receiving agency, not later than 30 days after receipt of such communication, unless otherwise specifically directed by the head of the agency, without delegation, after consultation with the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, to preserve appropriate confidentiality between the executive and legislative branches.Start Printed Page 6418
(c) Heads of agencies shall otherwise implement within their respective agencies the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, consistent with such instructions as the Director of the Office of Management and Budget may prescribe.
(d) The head of each agency shall upon request provide to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget information about earmarks and compliance with this order.
Sec. 3.
Definitions. For purposes of this order:
(a) The term “agency” means an executive agency as defined in section 105 of title 5, United States Code, and the United States Postal Service and the Postal Regulatory Commission, but shall exclude the Government Accountability Office; and
(b) the term “earmark” means funds provided by the Congress for projects, programs, or grants where the purported congressional direction (whether in statutory text, report language, or other communication) circumvents otherwise applicable merit-based or competitive allocation processes, or specifies the location or recipient, or otherwise curtails the ability of the executive branch to manage its statutory and constitutional responsibilities pertaining to the funds allocation process.
Sec. 4.
General Provisions. (a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(i) authority granted by law to an agency or the head thereof; or
(ii) functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(b) This order shall be implemented in a manner consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(c) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13458 of February 4, 2008
Implementation of the Protocol Additional to the Agreement Between the United States and the International Atomic Energy Agency for the Application of Safeguards in the United States of America
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the United States Additional Protocol Implementation Act (the “Act”)(Public Law 109-401) and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and in order to facilitate implementation of the Act and the Protocol Additional to the Agreement between the United States and the International Atomic Energy Agency for the Application of Safeguards in the United States of America (the “Additional Protocol”), it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. The Secretaries of State, Defense, Commerce, and Energy, the Attorney General, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, and heads of such other agencies as appropriate, each shall issue, amend, or revise, and enforce such regulations, orders, directives, instructions, or procedures as are necessary to implement the Act and United States obligations under the Additional Protocol.
Sec. 2. The Secretary of Commerce, with the assistance, as necessary, of the Attorney General, is authorized to obtain and to execute warrants pursuant to section 223 of the Act for the purpose of gaining complementary access to locations subject to regulations issued by the Department of Commerce pursuant to section 1 of this order.
Sec. 3. The Secretaries of State, Defense, Commerce, and Energy, the Attorney General, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, and heads of such other departments and agencies as appropriate, are authorized to carry out, consistent with the Act and in accordance with subsequent directives, appropriate functions that are not otherwise assigned in the Act and are necessary to implement the Act and United States obligations under the Additional Protocol. The Secretary of State shall perform the function of providing notifications or information to the Congress when required by the Act.
Sec. 4. This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
Start Printed Page 7182
Sec. 5. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13459 of February 7, 2008
Improving the Coordination and Effectiveness of Youth
Programs
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in recognition of the successful interagency collaboration resulting from the Helping America's Youth initiative, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. It is the policy of the Federal Government to promote achievement of positive results for at-risk youth through:
(a) enhanced collaboration among government organizations at the Federal, State, and local level, including with faith-based and other community organizations, as well as among families, schools, and communities, in order to leverage existing resources and improve outcomes;
(b) identification and dissemination of promising strategies and practices that have been proven effective through rigorous evaluation; and
(c) online publication of essential information to assist interested citizens and decision-makers, particularly at the community level, to plan, implement, and participate in effective programs for at-risk youth.
Sec. 2.
Establishment of the Interagency Working Group on Youth Programs. The Secretary of Health and Human Services (Secretary) shall establish within the Department of Health and Human Services for administrative purposes only, an Interagency Working Group on Youth Programs (Working Group), consistent with this order and reflecting the ongoing interagency collaboration under the Helping America's Youth initiative.
Sec. 3.
Membership and Operation of the Working Group.
(a) The Working Group shall consist exclusively of the following members or their designees, who shall be full-time Federal officers or employees:
(i) the Secretary;
(ii) the Attorney General;
(iii) the Secretaries of Defense, the Interior, Agriculture, Commerce, Labor, Housing and Urban Development, and Education;
(iv) the Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy;
(v) the Chief Executive Officer of the Corporation for National and Community Service; and
(vi) other officers or full-time or permanent part-time employees of the United States, as determined by the Secretary, with the concurrence of the head of the department or agency concerned.
(b) The Secretary (or the Secretary's designee) shall serve as Chair, and the Attorney General (or the Attorney General's designee) shall serve as Vice Chair, for a period of 2 years from the date of this order. Subsequent Chairs and Vice Chairs shall be designated by the Secretary on a biennial basis.
(c) In implementing this section, the Chair, and in the Chair's absence the Vice Chair, shall convene and preside at meetings of the Working Group, determine its agenda, direct its work, and establish and direct subgroups of the Working Group, as appropriate, to deal with particular subject matters, that shall consist exclusively of members of the Working Group or their Start Printed Page 8004designees. The Chair, after consultation with the Vice Chair, shall designate an officer or employee of one of the member departments or agencies to serve as the Executive Secretary of the Working Group. The Executive Secretary shall head any staff assigned to the Working Group and any subgroups thereof, and such staff shall consist exclusively of full-time or permanent part-time Federal employees.
Sec. 4.
Functions of the Working Group. Consistent with the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the Working Group shall:
(a) identify and engage key government and private or nonprofit organizations that can play a role in improving the coordination and effectiveness of programs serving and engaging youth, such as faith-based and other community organizations, businesses, volunteers, and other key constituencies;
(b) develop a new Federal website on youth, built upon the Community Guide to Helping America's Youth, with the first phase of this website to be launched within 10 months of the date of this order, by:
(i) identifying and assessing the strengths and weaknesses of existing Federal websites focusing on youth-serving entities in order to improve access to the most useful content;
(ii) providing for training to youth-serving entities to enable effective use of the Federal website;
(iii) developing additional strategies and tools and resources accessible through the Federal website that will help promote effective community-based efforts to reduce the factors that put youth at risk and the provision of high-quality services to at-risk youth across the country; and
(iv) developing strategies to ensure that the Federal website is routinely updated, improved, and publicized;
(c) encourage all youth-serving Federal and State agencies, communities, grantees, and organizations to adopt high standards for assessing program results, including through the use of rigorous impact evaluations, as appropriate, so that the most effective practices can be identified and replicated, and ineffective or duplicative programs can be eliminated or reformed;
(d)(i) identify and promote initiatives and activities that merit strong interagency collaboration because of their potential to offer cost-effective solutions to achieve better results for at-risk youth, including volunteer service in concert with the USA Freedom Corps and mentoring in concert with the Federal Mentoring Council; and,
(ii) encourage rigorous evaluations, as appropriate, of such initiatives and activities to ascertain their effectiveness in improving academic, employment, social, and other individual outcomes, and make these findings publicly available, and
(e) annually report to the President, through the Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy, on its work and on the implementation of any recommendations arising from its work, with the first such report to be submitted no later than 6 months after the date of this order.
Sec. 5.
Administration of the Working Group. (a) The Secretary shall, to the extent permitted by law, provide administrative support and funding for the Working Group.
With the consent of the Secretary, other member departments or agencies may provide administrative support to the Working Group, to the extent permitted by law and consistent with their statutory authority.
(b) The heads of executive departments and agencies shall provide, as appropriate, such assistance and information as the Secretary may request to implement this order.
(c) The website referred to in section 4(b) of this order shall be funded by contributions from executive departments and agencies to the extent permitted by law and consistent with their statutory authority.Start Printed Page 8005
Sec. 6.
General Provisions. (a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(i) authority granted by law to a department, agency, or the head thereof; or
(ii) functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(b) This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(c) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13460 of February 13, 2008
Blocking Property of Additional Persons in Connection With the National Emergency With Respect to Syria
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.)(IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, find that the Government of Syria continues to engage in certain conduct that formed the basis for the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13338 of May 11, 2004, including but not limited to undermining efforts with respect to the stabilization of Iraq. I further find that the conduct of certain members of the Government of Syria and other persons contributing to public corruption related to Syria, including by misusing Syrian public assets or by misusing public authority, entrenches and enriches the Government of Syria and its supporters and thereby enables the Government of Syria to continue to engage in certain conduct that formed the basis for the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13338. In light of these findings, and to take additional steps with respect to the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13338 of May 11, 2004, I hereby order:
Section 1. (a) Except to the extent provided in section 203(b)(1), (3), and (4) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(1), (3) and (4)), the Trade Sanctions Reform and Export Enhancement Act of 2000 (title IX, Public Law 106-387), or regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date of this order, all property and interests in property that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of any United States person, including any overseas branch, of the following persons are blocked and may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in: persons determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, to be responsible for, to have engaged in, to have facilitated, or to have secured improper advantage as a result of, public corruption by senior officials within the Government of Syria.
(b) The prohibitions in paragraph (a) of this section include, but are not limited to, (i) the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any person designated pursuant to this order, and (ii) the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.
Sec. 2. Section 3(a)(iv) of Executive Order 13338 is hereby amended to read as follows:
“(iv) to be or to have been responsible for or otherwise significantly contributing to actions taken or decisions made by the Government of Syria that have the purpose or effect of undermining efforts to stabilize Iraq or of allowing the use of Syrian territory or facilities to undermine efforts to stabilize Iraq; or”.
Sec. 3. (a) Any transaction by a United States person or within the United States that evades or avoids, has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited. Start Printed Page 8992
(b) Any conspiracy formed to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
Sec. 4. For purposes of this order:
(a) the term “person” means any individual or entity;
(b) the term “entity” means a partnership, association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization; and
(c) the term “United States person” means any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States.
Sec. 5. I hereby determine that the making of donations of the type specified in section 203(b)(2) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)) by, to, or for the benefit of, persons whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to section 1 of this order would seriously impair my ability to deal with the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13338 and relied upon for additional steps taken in Executive Order 13399 of April 25, 2006, and I hereby prohibit such donations as provided by section 1 of this order.
Sec. 6. For those persons whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to section 1 of this order who might have a constitutional presence in the United States, I find that, because of the ability to transfer funds or other assets instantaneously, prior notice to such persons of measures to be taken pursuant to this order would render these measures ineffectual. I therefore determine that for these measures to be effective in addressing the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13338 and relied upon for additional steps taken in Executive Order 13399, there need be no prior notice of a determination made pursuant to this order.
Sec. 7. The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government, consistent with applicable law. All executive agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order and, where appropriate, to advise the Secretary of the Treasury in a timely manner of the measures taken.
Sec. 8. Nothing in this order is intended to affect the continued effectiveness of any rules, regulations, orders, licenses, or other forms of administrative action issued, taken, or continued in effect heretofore or hereafter under 31 C.F.R. chapter V, except as expressly terminated, modified, or suspended by or pursuant to this order. Start Printed Page 8993
Sec. 9. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13461 of February 15, 2008
Providing an Order of Succession Within the Department of Health and Human Services
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, 5 U.S.C. 3345 et seq., it is hereby ordered that:
Section 1. Subject to the provisions of section 3 of this order, the officers named in section 2, in the order listed, shall act as and perform the functions and duties of the Office of the Secretary of Health and Human Services (Secretary), if they are eligible to act as Secretary under the provisions of the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, during any period in which the Secretary has died, resigned, or become otherwise unable to perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary.
Sec. 2.
Order of Succession.
(a) Deputy Secretary of Health and Human Services;
(b) General Counsel of the Department of Health and Human Services;
(c) Assistant Secretary (Resources and Technology);
(d) Assistant Secretary (Planning and Evaluation);
(e) Administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services;
(f) Commissioner of Food and Drugs;
(g) Director of the National Institutes of Health;
(h) Assistant Secretary for Family Support;
(i) Other Assistant Secretaries of the Department of Health and Human Services appointed by the President, in the order in which they shall have taken the oath of office as such;
(j) Director, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; and
(k) Director, Region 4.
Sec. 3.
Exceptions.
(a) No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 2 of this order in an acting capacity, by virtue of so serving, shall act as Secretary pursuant to this order.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of this order, the President retains discretion, consistent with the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, to depart from this order in designating an acting Secretary.
Start Printed Page 9438
Sec. 4.
Revocation. Executive Order 13250 of December 28, 2001 (Providing An Order of Succession Within the Department of Health and Human Services), and the President's memorandum of March 19, 2002 (Designation of Officers of the Department of Health and Human Services), are hereby revoked.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13462 of February 29, 2008
President's Intelligence Advisory Board and Intelligence Oversight Board
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. It is the policy of the United States to ensure that the President and other officers of the United States with responsibility for the security of the Nation and the advancement of its interests have access to accurate, insightful, objective, and timely information concerning the capabilities, intentions, and activities of foreign powers.
Sec. 2.
Definitions. As used in this order:
(a) “department concerned” means an executive department listed in section 101 of title 5, United States Code, that contains an organization listed in or designated pursuant to section 3(4) of the National Security Act of 1947, as amended (50 U.S.C. 401a(4));
(b) “intelligence activities” has the meaning specified in section 3.4 of Executive Order 12333 of December 4, 1981, as amended; and
(c) “intelligence community” means the organizations listed in or designated pursuant to section 3(4) of the National Security Act of 1947, as amended.
Sec. 3.
Establishment of the President's Intelligence Advisory Board. (a) There is hereby established, within the Executive Office of the President and exclusively to advise and assist the President as set forth in this order, the President's Intelligence Advisory Board (PIAB).
(b) The PIAB shall consist of not more than 16 members appointed by the President from among individuals who are not employed by the Federal Government.
(c) The President shall designate a Chair from among the members of the PIAB, who shall convene and preside at meetings of the PIAB, determine its agenda, and direct its work.
(d) Members of the PIAB and the Intelligence Oversight Board (IOB) established in section 5 of this order:
(i) shall serve without any compensation for their work on the PIAB or the IOB; and
(ii) while engaged in the work of the PIAB or the IOB, may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in the Government (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707).
(e) The PIAB shall utilize such full-time professional and administrative staff as authorized by the Chair and approved by the President or the President's designee. Such staff shall be supervised by an Executive Director of the PIAB, appointed by the President, whom the President may designate to serve also as the Executive Director of the IOB.
Sec. 4.
Functions of the PIAB. Consistent with the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the PIAB shall have the authority to, as the PIAB determines appropriate, or shall, when directed by the President:
Start Printed Page 11806
(a) assess the quality, quantity, and adequacy of intelligence collection, of analysis and estimates, and of counterintelligence and other intelligence activities, assess the adequacy of management, personnel and organization in the intelligence community, and review the performance of all agencies of the Federal Government that are engaged in the collection, evaluation, or production of intelligence or the execution of intelligence policy and report the results of such assessments or reviews:
(i) to the President, as necessary but not less than twice each year; and
(ii) to the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) and the heads of departments concerned when the PIAB determines appropriate; and
(b) consider and make appropriate recommendations to the President, the DNI, or the head of the department concerned with respect to matters identified to the PIAB by the DNI or the head of a department concerned.
Sec. 5.
Establishment of Intelligence Oversight Board.
(a) There is hereby established a committee of the PIAB to be known as the Intelligence Oversight Board.
(b) The IOB shall consist of not more than five members of the PIAB who are designated by the President from among members of the PIAB to serve on the IOB. The IOB shall utilize such full-time professional and administrative staff as authorized by the Chair and approved by the President or the President's designee. Such staff shall be supervised by an Executive Director of the IOB, appointed by the President, whom the President may designate to serve also as the Executive Director of the PIAB.
(c) The President shall designate a Chair from among the members of the IOB, who shall convene and preside at meetings of the IOB, determine its agenda, and direct its work.
Sec. 6.
Functions of the IOB. Consistent with the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the IOB shall:
(a) issue criteria on the thresholds for reporting matters to the IOB, to the extent consistent with section 1.7(d) of Executive Order 12333 or the corresponding provision of any successor order;
(b) inform the President of intelligence activities that the IOB believes:
(i)(A) may be unlawful or contrary to Executive Order or presidential directive; and
(B) are not being adequately addressed by the Attorney General, the DNI, or the head of the department concerned; or
(ii) should be immediately reported to the President.
(c) review and assess the effectiveness, efficiency, and sufficiency of the processes by which the DNI and the heads of departments concerned perform their respective functions under this order and report thereon as necessary, together with any recommendations, to the President and, as appropriate, the DNI and the head of the department concerned;
(d) receive and review information submitted by the DNI under subsection 7(c) of this order and make recommendations thereon, including for any needed corrective action, with respect to such information, and the intelligence activities to which the information relates, as necessary, but not less than twice each year, to the President, the DNI, and the head of the department concerned; and
(e) conduct, or request that the DNI or the head of the department concerned, as appropriate, carry out and report to the IOB the results of, investigations of intelligence activities that the IOB determines are necessary to enable the IOB to carry out its functions under this order.
Sec. 7.
Functions of the Director of National Intelligence. Consistent with the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the DNI shall:Start Printed Page 11807
(a) with respect to guidelines applicable to organizations within the intelligence community that concern reporting of intelligence activities described in subsection 6(b)(i)(A) of this order:
(i) review and ensure that such guidelines are consistent with section 1.7(d) of Executive Order 12333, or a corresponding provision of any successor order, and this order; and
(ii) issue for incorporation in such guidelines instructions relating to the format and schedule of such reporting as necessary to implement this order;
(b) with respect to intelligence activities described in subsection 6(b)(i)(A) of this order:
(i) receive reports submitted to the IOB pursuant to section 1.7(d) of Executive Order 12333, or a corresponding provision of any successor order;
(ii) forward to the Attorney General information in such reports relating to such intelligence activities to the extent that such activities involve possible violations of Federal criminal laws or implicate the authority of the Attorney General unless the DNI or the head of the department concerned has previously provided such information to the Attorney General; and
(iii) monitor the intelligence community to ensure that the head of the department concerned has directed needed corrective actions and that such actions have been taken and report to the IOB and the head of the department concerned, and as appropriate the President, when such actions have not been timely taken; and
(c) submit to the IOB as necessary and no less than twice each year:
(i) an analysis of the reports received under subsection (b)(i) of this section, including an assessment of the gravity, frequency, trends, and patterns of occurrences of intelligence activities described in subsection 6(b)(i)(A) of this order;
(ii) a summary of direction under subsection (b)(iii) of this section and any related recommendations; and
(iii) an assessment of the effectiveness of corrective action taken by the DNI or the head of the department concerned with respect to intelligence activities described in subsection 6(b)(i)(A) of this order.
Sec. 8.
Functions of Heads of Departments Concerned and Additional Functions of the Director of National Intelligence.
(a) To the extent permitted by law, the DNI and the heads of departments concerned shall provide such information and assistance as the PIAB and the IOB may need to perform functions under this order.
(b) The heads of departments concerned shall:
(i) ensure that the DNI receives:
(A) copies of reports submitted to the IOB pursuant to section 1.7(d) of Executive Order 12333, or a corresponding provision of any successor order; and
(B) such information and assistance as the DNI may need to perform functions under this order; and
(ii) designate the offices within their respective organizations that shall submit reports to the IOB required by Executive Order and inform the DNI and the IOB of such designations; and
(iii) ensure that departments concerned comply with instructions issued by the DNI under subsection 7(a)(ii) of this order.
(c) The head of a department concerned who does not implement a recommendation to that head of department from the PIAB under subsection 4(b) of this order or from the IOB under subsections 6(c) or 6(d) of this order shall promptly report through the DNI to the Board that made the recommendation, or to the President, the reasons for not implementing the recommendation.
Start Printed Page 11808
(d) The DNI shall ensure that the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency performs the functions with respect to the Central Intelligence Agency under this order that a head of a department concerned performs with respect to organizations within the intelligence community that are part of that department.
Sec. 9.
References and Transition. (a) References in Executive Orders other than this order, or in any other presidential guidance, to the “President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board” shall be deemed to be references to the President's Intelligence Advisory Board established by this order.
(b) Individuals who are members of the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board under Executive Order 12863 of September 13, 1993, as amended, immediately prior to the signing of this order shall be members of the President's Intelligence Advisory Board immediately upon the signing of this order, to serve as such consistent with this order until the date that is 15 months following the date of this order.
(c) Individuals who are members of the Intelligence Oversight Board under Executive Order 12863 immediately prior to the signing of this order shall be members of the Intelligence Oversight Board under this order, to serve as such consistent with this order until the date that is 15 months following the date of this order.
(d) The individual serving as Executive Director of the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board immediately prior to the signing of this order shall serve as the Executive Director of the PIAB until such person resigns, dies, or is removed, or upon appointment of a successor under this order and shall serve as the Executive Director of the IOB until an Executive Director of the IOB is appointed or designated under this order.
Sec. 10.
Revocation. Executive Order 12863 is revoked.
Sec. 11.
General Provisions.
(a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(i) authority granted by law to a department or agency, or the head thereof; or
(ii) functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(b) Any person who is a member of the PIAB or IOB, or who is granted access to classified national security information in relation to the activities of the PIAB or the IOB, as a condition of access to such information, shall sign and comply with the agreements to protect such information from unauthorized disclosure. This order shall be implemented in a manner consistent with Executive Order 12958 of April 17, 1995, as amended, and Executive Order 12968 of August 2, 1995, as amended.
(c) This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
Start Printed Page 11809
(d) This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13463 of April 18, 2008
Amending Executive Orders 13389 and 13390
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5121-5206), it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Executive Order 13389 of November 1, 2005, as amended, is further amended:
(a) in subsection 2(a), by striking “Economic Policy” and inserting in lieu thereof “Homeland Security and Counterterrorism”; and
(b) in section 5, by striking “3 years from the date of this order” and inserting in lieu thereof “February 28, 2009”.
Sec. 2. Subsection 5(b) of Executive Order 13390 of November 1, 2005, is amended:
(a) by striking the comma after “applicable law” and inserting “and”; and
(b) striking “3 years from the date of this order” and inserting in lieu thereof “February 28, 2009”.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13464 of April 30, 2008
Blocking Property and Prohibiting Certain Transactions Related to Burma
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.), the Burmese Freedom and Democracy Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-61, as amended, 50 U.S.C. 1701 note), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and in order to take additional steps with respect to the Government of Burma's continued repression of the democratic opposition in Burma, and with respect to the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13047 of May 20, 1997, relied upon for additional steps taken in Executive Order 13310 of July 28, 2003, and expanded in Executive Order 13448 of October 18, 2007,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, hereby order:
Section 1. Except to the extent provided in section 203(b)(1), (3), and (4) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(1), (3), and (4)), the Trade Sanctions Reform and Export Enhancement Act of 2000 (title IX, Public Law 106-387), or regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the effective date of this order, all property and interests in property of the following persons that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of United States persons, including their overseas branches, are blocked and may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in:
(a) the persons listed in the Annex attached and made a part of this order; and
(b) any person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State:
(i) to be owned or controlled by, directly or indirectly, the Government of Burma or an official or officials of the Government of Burma;
(ii) to have materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, logistical, or technical support for, or goods or services in support of, the Government of Burma, the State Peace and Development Council of Burma, the Union Solidarity and Development Association of Burma, any successor entity to any of the foregoing, any senior official of any of the foregoing, or any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to Executive Order 13310, Executive Order 13448, or this order; or
(iii) to be owned or controlled by, or to have acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to Executive Order 13310, Executive Order 13448, or this order.
Sec. 2. (a) Any transaction by a United States person or within the United States that evades or avoids, has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
(b) Any conspiracy formed to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited. Start Printed Page 24492
Sec. 3. For purposes of this order:
(a) the term “person” means an individual or entity;
(b) the term “entity” means a partnership, association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization;
(c) the term “United States person” means any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States; and
(d) the term “Government of Burma” means the Government of Burma (sometimes referred to as Myanmar), its agencies, instrumentalities and controlled entities, and the Central Bank of Burma.
Sec. 4. I hereby determine that the making of donations of the type specified in section 203(b)(2) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)) by, to, or for the benefit of, persons whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to section 1 of this order would seriously impair my ability to deal with the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13047, relied upon for additional steps taken in Executive Order 13310, and expanded in Executive Order 13448, and hereby prohibit such donations as provided by section 1 of this order.
Sec. 5. For those persons whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order who might have a constitutional presence in the United States, I find that because of the ability to transfer funds or other assets instantaneously, prior notice to such persons of measures to be taken pursuant to this order would render these measures ineffectual. I therefore determine that for these measures to be effective in addressing the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13047, relied upon for additional steps taken in Executive Order 13310, and expanded in Executive Order 13448, there need be no prior notice of a listing or determination made pursuant to section 1 of this order.
Sec. 6. The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA and section 4 of the Burmese Freedom and Democracy Act of 2003 as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government consistent with applicable law. All agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order.
Sec. 7. The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to determine, and to take necessary action to give effect to that determination, that circumstances no longer warrant the blocking of the property and interests in property of, or the prohibiting of transactions with, a person listed in the Annex to this order.
Sec. 8. Nothing in this order is intended to affect the continued effectiveness of any rules, regulations, orders, licenses, or other forms of administrative action issued, taken, or continued in effect heretofore or hereafter under 31 C.F.R. chapter V, except as expressly terminated, modified, or suspended by or pursuant to this order.
Sec. 9. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
Start Printed Page 24493
Sec. 10. This order is effective at 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time on May 1, 2008.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
April 30, 2008.
Executive Order 13465 of June 6, 2008
Amending Executive Order 12989, as Amended
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including subsection 121(a) of title 40 and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and in order to take further steps to promote economy and efficiency in Federal Government procurement, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Executive Order 12989 of February 13, 1996, as amended, is further amended:
(a) by striking the title and inserting in lieu thereof “Economy and Efficiency in Government Procurement Through Compliance with Certain Immigration and Nationality Act Provisions and Use of an Electronic Employment Eligibility Verification System”; and
(b) by striking the material that follows the title and precedes section 1 of the order and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
“This order is designed to promote economy and efficiency in Federal Government procurement. Stability and dependability are important elements of economy and efficiency. A contractor whose workforce is less stable will be less likely to produce goods and services economically and efficiently than a contractor whose workforce is more stable. It is the policy of the executive branch to enforce fully the immigration laws of the United States, including the detection and removal of illegal aliens and the imposition of legal sanctions against employers that hire illegal aliens. Because of the worksite enforcement policy of the United States and the underlying obligation of the executive branch to enforce the immigration laws, contractors that employ illegal aliens cannot rely on the continuing availability and service of those illegal workers, and such contractors inevitably will have a less stable and less dependable workforce than contractors that do not employ such persons. Where a contractor assigns illegal aliens to work on Federal contracts, the enforcement of Federal immigration laws imposes a direct risk of disruption, delay, and increased expense in Federal contracting. Such contractors are less dependable procurement sources, even if they do not knowingly hire or knowingly continue to employ unauthorized workers.
“Contractors that adopt rigorous employment eligibility confirmation policies are much less likely to face immigration enforcement actions, because they are less likely to employ unauthorized workers, and they are therefore generally more efficient and dependable procurement sources than contractors that do not employ the best available measures to verify the work eligibility of their workforce. It is the policy of the executive branch to use an electronic employment verification system because, among other reasons, it provides the best available means to confirm the identity and work eligibility of all employees that join the Federal workforce. Private employers that choose to contract with the Federal Government should meet the same standard.
“I find, therefore, that adherence to the general policy of contracting only with providers that do not knowingly employ unauthorized alien workers and that have agreed to utilize an electronic employment verification system designated by the Secretary of Homeland Security to confirm the employment eligibility of their workforce will promote economy and efficiency in Federal procurement. Start Printed Page 33286
“NOW, THEREFORE, to ensure the economical and efficient administration and completion of Federal Government contracts, and by the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including subsection 121(a) of title 40 and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:”.
Sec. 2. Section 1 of Executive Order 12989, as amended, is further amended by:
(a) striking the last sentence in subsection 1(a); and
(b) striking subsection (b) and inserting in lieu thereof the following new subsections:
“(b) It is the policy of the executive branch in procuring goods and services that, to ensure the economical and efficient administration and completion of Federal Government contracts, contracting agencies may not enter into contracts with employers that do not use the best available means to confirm the work authorization of their workforce.
“(c) It is the policy of the executive branch to enforce fully the antidiscrimination provisions of the INA. Nothing in this order relieves employers of antidiscrimination obligations under section 274B of the INA (8 U.S.C. 1324b) or any other law.
“(d) All discretion under this order shall be exercised consistent with the policies set forth in this section.”.
Sec. 3. Section 5 of Executive Order 12989, as amended, is further amended to read as follows:
“Sec. 5. (a) Executive departments and agencies that enter into contracts shall require, as a condition of each contract, that the contractor agree to use an electronic employment eligibility verification system designated by the Secretary of Homeland Security to verify the employment eligibility of: (i) all persons hired during the contract term by the contractor to perform employment duties within the United States; and (ii) all persons assigned by the contractor to perform work within the United States on the Federal contract.
“(b) The Secretary of Homeland Security:
“(i) shall administer, maintain, and modify as necessary and appropriate the electronic employment eligibility verification system designated by the Secretary under subsection (a) of this section; and
“(ii) may establish with respect to such electronic employment verification system:
“(A) terms and conditions for use of the system; and
“(B) procedures for monitoring the use, failure to use, or improper use of the system.
“(c) The Secretary of Defense, the Administrator of General Services, and the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration shall amend the Federal Acquisition Regulation to the extent necessary and appropriate to implement the debarment responsibility, the employment eligibility verification responsibility, and other related responsibilities assigned to heads of departments and agencies under this order.
“(d) Except to the extent otherwise specified by law or this order, the Secretary of Homeland Security and the Attorney General:
“(i) shall administer and enforce this order; and
“(ii) may, after consultation to the extent appropriate with the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Labor, the Administrator of General Services, the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Administrator for Federal Procurement Policy, and the heads of such other departments or agencies as may be appropriate, issue such rules, regulations, or orders, or establish such requirements, as may be necessary and appropriate to implement this order.”. Start Printed Page 33287
Sec. 4. Section 7 of Executive Order 12989, as amended, is amended by striking “respective agencies” and inserting in lieu thereof “respective departments or agencies”.
Sec. 5. Section 8 of Executive Order 12989, as amended, is amended to read as follows:
“Sec. 8. (a) This order shall be implemented in a manner intended to minimize the burden on participants in the Federal procurement process.
“(b) This order shall be implemented in a manner consistent with the protection of intelligence and law enforcement sources, methods, and activities from unauthorized disclosure.”.
Sec. 6. Section 9 of Executive Order 12989, as amended, is amended to read as follows:
“Sec. 9. (a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(i) authority granted by law to a department or agency or the head thereof; or
(ii) functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
“(b) This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
“(c) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.”.
Sec. 7. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 36787
Executive Order 13466 of June 26, 2008
Continuing Certain Restrictions With Respect to North Korea and North Korean Nationals
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) (NEA), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, find that the current existence and risk of the proliferation of weapons-usable fissile material on the Korean Peninsula constitute an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States, and I hereby declare a national emergency to deal with that threat. I further find that, as we deal with that threat through multilateral diplomacy, it is necessary to continue certain restrictions with respect to North Korea that would otherwise be lifted pursuant to a forthcoming proclamation that will terminate the exercise of authorities under the Trading With the Enemy Act (50 U.S.C. App. 1 et seq.) (TWEA) with respect to North Korea.
Accordingly, I hereby order:
Section 1. Except to the extent provided in statutes or in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the date of this order, the following are blocked and may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in:
all property and interests in property of North Korea or a North Korean national that, pursuant to the President's authorities under the TWEA, the exercise of which has been continued in accordance with section 101(b) of Public Law 95-223 (91 Stat. 1625; 50 U.S.C. App. 5(b) note), were blocked as of June 16, 2000, and remained blocked immediately prior to the date of this order.
Sec. 2. Except to the extent provided in statutes or in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the date of this order, United States persons may not register a vessel in North Korea, obtain authorization for a vessel to fly the North Korean flag, or own, lease, operate, or insure any vessel flagged by North Korea.
Sec. 3. (a) Any transaction by a United States person or within the United States that evades or avoids, has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
(b) Any conspiracy formed to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
Sec. 4. For the purposes of this order:
(a) the term “person” means an individual or entity;
(b) the term “entity” means a partnership, association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization; and
(c) the term “United States person” means any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States. Start Printed Page 36788
Sec. 5. The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government consistent with applicable law. All agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order.
Sec. 6. The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to submit the recurring and final reports to the Congress on the national emergency declared in this order, consistent with section 401(c) of the NEA (50 U.S.C. 1641(c)) and section 204(c) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1703(c)).
Sec. 7. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13467 of June 30, 2008
Reforming Processes Related to Suitability for Government Employment, Fitness for Contractor Employees, and Eligibility for Access to Classified National Security Information
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to ensure an efficient, practical, reciprocal, and aligned system for investigating and determining suitability for Government employment, contractor employee fitness, and eligibility for access to classified information, while taking appropriate account of title III of Public Law 108-458, it is hereby ordered as follows:
PART 1—POLICY, APPLICABILITY, AND DEFINITIONS
Section 1.1.
Policy. Executive branch policies and procedures relating to suitability, contractor employee fitness, eligibility to hold a sensitive position, access to federally controlled facilities and information systems, and eligibility for access to classified information shall be aligned using consistent standards to the extent possible, provide for reciprocal recognition, and shall ensure cost-effective, timely,and efficient protection of the national interest, while providing fair treatment to those upon whom the Federal Government relies to conduct our Nation's business and protect national security.
Sec. 1.2.
Applicability. (a) This order applies to all covered individuals as defined in section 1.3(g), except that:
(i) the provisions regarding eligibility for physical access to federally controlled facilities and logical access to federally controlled information systems do not apply to individuals exempted in accordance with guidance pursuant to the Federal Information Security Management Act (title III of Public Law 107-347) and Homeland Security Presidential Directive 12; and
(ii) the qualification standards for enlistment, appointment, and induction into the Armed Forces pursuant to title 10, United States Code, are unaffected by this order.
(b) This order also applies to investigations and determinations of eligibility for access to classified information for employees of agencies working in or for the legislative or judicial branches when those investigations or determinations are conducted by the executive branch. Sec. 1.3.
Definitions. For the purpose of this order: (a) “Adjudication” means the evaluation of pertinent data in a background investigation, as well as any other available information that is relevant and reliable, to determine whether a covered individual is:
(i) suitable for Government employment;
(ii) eligible for logical and physical access;
(iii) eligible for access to classified information;
(iv) eligible to hold a sensitive position; or
(v) fit to perform work for or on behalf of the Government as a contractor employee.
(b) “Agency” means any “Executive agency” as defined in section 105 of title 5, United States Code, including the “military departments,” as defined in section 102 of title 5, United States Code, and any other entity Start Printed Page 38104within the executive branch that comes into possession of classified information or has designated positions as sensitive, except such an entity headed by an officer who is not a covered individual.
(c) “Classified information” means information that has been determined pursuant to Executive Order 12958 of April 17, 1995, as amended, or a successor or predecessor order, or the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.) to require protection against unauthorized disclosure.
(d) “Continuous evaluation” means reviewing the background of an individual who has been determined to be eligible for access to classified information (including additional or new checks of commercial databases, Government databases, and other information lawfully available to security officials) at any time during the period of eligibility to determine whether that individual continues to meet the requirements for eligibility for access to classified information.
(e) “Contractor” means an expert or consultant (not appointed under section 3109 of title 5, United States Code) to an agency; an industrial or commercial contractor, licensee, certificate holder, or grantee of any agency, including all subcontractors; a personal services contractor; or any other category of person who performs work for or on behalf of an agency (but not a Federal employee).
(f) “Contractor employee fitness” means fitness based on character and conduct for work for or on behalf of the Government as a contractor employee.
(g) “Covered individual” means a person who performs work for or on behalf of the executive branch, or who seeks to perform work for or on behalf of the executive branch, but does not include:
(i) the President or (except to the extent otherwise directed by the President) employees of the President under section 105 or 107 of title 3, United States Code; or
(ii) the Vice President or (except to the extent otherwise directed by the Vice President) employees of the Vice President under section 106 of title 3 or annual legislative branch appropriations acts.
(h) “End-to-end automation” means an executive branch-wide federated system that uses automation to manage and monitor cases and maintain relevant documentation of the application (but not an employment application), investigation, adjudication, and continuous evaluation processes.
(i) “Federally controlled facilities” and “federally controlled information systems” have the meanings prescribed in guidance pursuant to the Federal Information Security Management Act (title III of Public Law 107-347) and Homeland Security Presidential Directive 12.
(j) “Logical and physical access” means access other than occasional or intermittent access to federally controlled facilities or information systems.
(k) “Sensitive position” means any position so designated under Executive Order 10450 of April 27, 1953, as amended.
(l) “Suitability” has the meaning and coverage provided in 5 CFR Part 731.
PART 2—ALIGNMENT, RECIPROCITY, AND GOVERNANCE
Sec. 2.1.
Aligned System. (a) Investigations and adjudications of covered individuals who require a determination of suitability, eligibility for logical and physical access, eligibility to hold a sensitive position, eligibility for access to classified information, and, as appropriate, contractor employee fitness, shall be aligned using consistent standards to the extent possible. Each successively higher level of investigation and adjudication shall build upon, but not duplicate, the ones below it.
(b) The aligned system shall employ updated and consistent standards and methods, enable innovations with enterprise information technology capabilities and end-to-end automation to the extent practicable, and ensure that relevant information maintained by agencies can be accessed and shared Start Printed Page 38105rapidly across the executive branch, while protecting national security, protecting privacy-related information, ensuring resulting decisions are in the national interest, and providing the Federal Government with an effective workforce.
(c) Except as otherwise authorized by law, background investigations and adjudications shall be mutually and reciprocally accepted by all agencies. An agency may not establish additional investigative or adjudicative requirements (other than requirements for the conduct of a polygraph examination consistent with law, directive, or regulation) that exceed the requirements for suitability, contractor employee fitness, eligibility for logical or physical access, eligibility to hold a sensitive position, or eligibility for access to classified information without the approval of the Suitability Executive Agent or Security Executive Agent, as appropriate, and provided that approval to establish additional requirements shall be limited to circumstances where additional requirements are necessary to address significant needs unique to the agency involved or to protect national security.
Sec. 2.2.
Establishment and Functions of Performance Accountability Council. (a) There is hereby established a Suitability and Security Clearance Performance Accountability Council (Council).
(b) The Deputy Director for Management, Office of Management and Budget, shall serve as Chair of the Council and shall have authority, direction, and control over the Council's functions. Membership on the Council shall include the Suitability Executive Agent and the Security Executive Agent. The Chair shall select a Vice Chair to act in the Chair's absence. The Chair shall have authority to designate officials from additional agencies who shall serve as members of the Council. Council membership shall be limited to Federal Government employees and shall include suitability and security professionals.
(c) The Council shall be accountable to the President to achieve, consistent with this order, the goals of reform, and is responsible for driving implementation of the reform effort, ensuring accountability by agencies, ensuring the Suitability Executive Agent and the Security Executive Agent align their respective processes, and sustaining reform momentum.
(d) The Council shall:
(i) ensure alignment of suitability, security, and, as appropriate, contractor employee fitness investigative and adjudicative processes;
(ii) hold agencies accountable for the implementation of suitability, security, and, as appropriate, contractor employee fitness processes and procedures;
(iii) establish requirements for enterprise information technology;
(iv) establish annual goals and progress metrics and prepare annual reports on results;
(v) ensure and oversee the development of tools and techniques for enhancing background investigations and the making of eligibility determinations;
(vi) arbitrate disparities in procedures between the Suitability Executive Agent and the Security Executive Agent;
(vii) ensure sharing of best practices; and
(viii) advise the Suitability Executive Agent and the Security Executive Agent on policies affecting the alignment of investigations and adjudications.
(e) The Chair may, to ensure the effective implementation of the policy set forth in section 1.1 of this order and to the extent consistent with law, assign, in whole or in part, to the head of any agency (solely or jointly) any function within the Council's responsibility relating to alignment and improvement of investigations and determinations of suitability, contractor employee fitness, eligibility for logical and physical access, eligibility for access to classified information, or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. Start Printed Page 38106
Sec. 2.3.
Establishment, Designation, and Functions of Executive Agents. (a) There is hereby established a Suitability Executive Agent and a Security Executive Agent.
(b) The Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall serve as the Suitability Executive Agent. As the Suitability Executive Agent, the Director of the Office of Personnel Management will continue to be responsible for developing and implementing uniform and consistent policies and procedures to ensure the effective, efficient, and timely completion of investigations and adjudications relating to determinations of suitability and eligibility for logical and physical access.
(c) The Director of National Intelligence shall serve as the Security Executive Agent. The Security Executive Agent:
(i) shall direct the oversight of investigations and determinations of eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position made by any agency;
(ii) shall be responsible for developing uniform and consistent policies and procedures to ensure the effective, efficient, and timely completion of investigations and adjudications relating to determinations of eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position;
(iii) may issue guidelines and instructions to the heads of agencies to ensure appropriate uniformity, centralization, efficiency, effectiveness, and timeliness in processes relating to determinations by agencies of eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position;
(iv) shall serve as the final authority to designate an agency or agencies to conduct investigations of persons who are proposed for access to classified information to ascertain whether such persons satisfy the criteria for obtaining and retaining access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position;
(v) shall serve as the final authority to designate an agency or agencies to determine eligibility for access to classified information in accordance with Executive Order 12968 of August 2, 1995;
(vi) shall ensure reciprocal recognition of eligibility for access to classified information among the agencies, including acting as the final authority to arbitrate and resolve disputes among the agencies involving the reciprocity of investigations and determinations of eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position; and
(vii) may assign, in whole or in part, to the head of any agency (solely or jointly) any of the functions detailed in (i) through (vi), above, with the agency's exercise of such assigned functions to be subject to the Security Executive Agent's oversight and with such terms and conditions (including approval by the Security Executive Agent) as the Security Executive Agent determines appropriate.
(d) Nothing in this order shall be construed in a manner that would limit the authorities of the Director of the Office of Personnel Management or the Director of National Intelligence under law.
Sec. 2.4.
Additional Functions. (a) The duties assigned to the Security Policy Board by Executive Order 12968 of August 2, 1995, to consider, coordinate, and recommend policy directives for executive branch security policies, procedures, and practices are reassigned to the Security Executive Agent.
(b) Heads of agencies shall:
(i) carry out any function assigned to the agency head by the Chair, and shall assist the Chair, the Council, the Suitability Executive Agent, and the Security Executive Agent in carrying out any function under sections 2.2 and 2.3 of this order;
(ii) implement any policy or procedure developed pursuant to this order;
(iii) to the extent permitted by law, make available to the Performance Accountability Council, the Suitability Executive Agent, or the Security Start Printed Page 38107Executive Agent such information as may be requested to implement this order;
(iv) ensure that all actions taken under this order take account of the counterintelligence interests of the United States, as appropriate; and
(v) ensure that actions taken under this order are consistent with the President's constitutional authority to:
(A) conduct the foreign affairs of the United States;
(B) withhold information the disclosure of which could impair the foreign relations, the national security, the deliberative processes of the Executive, or the performance of the Executive's constitutional duties;
(C) recommend for congressional consideration such measures as the President may judge necessary or expedient; and
(D) supervise the unitary executive branch.
PART 3—MISCELLANEOUS
Sec. 3.
General Provisions. (a) Executive Order 13381 of June 27, 2005, as amended, is revoked. Nothing in this order shall:
(i) supersede, impede, or otherwise affect:
(A) Executive Order 10450 of April 27, 1953, as amended;
(B) Executive Order 10577 of November 23, 1954, as amended;
(C) Executive Order 12333 of December 4, 1981, as amended;
(D) Executive Order 12829 of January 6, 1993, as amended; or
(E) Executive Order 12958 of April 17, 1995, as amended; nor
(ii) diminish or otherwise affect the denial and revocation procedures provided to individuals covered by Executive Order 10865 of February 20, 1960, as amended.
(b) Executive Order 12968 of August 2, 1995 is amended:
(i) by inserting: “Sec. 3.5.
Continuous Evaluation.
An individual who has been determined to be eligible for or who currently has access to classified information shall be subject to continuous evaluation under standards (including, but not limited to, the frequency of such evaluation) as determined by the Director of National Intelligence.”; and
(ii) by striking “the Security Policy Board shall make recommendations to the President through the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs” in section 6.3(a) and inserting in lieu thereof “the Director of National Intelligence shall serve as the final authority”;
(iii) by striking “Security Policy Board” and inserting in lieu thereof “Security Executive Agent” in each instance;
(iv) by striking “the Board” in section 1.1(j) and inserting in lieu thereof “the Security Executive Agent”; and
(v) by inserting “or appropriate automated procedures” in section 3.1(b) after “by appropriately trained adjudicative personnel”.
(c) Nothing in this order shall supersede, impede, or otherwise affect the remainder of Executive Order 12968 of August 2, 1995, as amended.
(d) Executive Order 12171 of November 19, 1979, as amended, is further amended by striking “The Center for Federal Investigative Services” in section 1-216 and inserting in lieu thereof “The Federal Investigative Services Division.”
(e) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the:
(i) authority granted by law to a department or agency, or the head thereof; or
(ii) functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(f) This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.Start Printed Page 38108
(g) Existing delegations of authority made pursuant to Executive Order 13381 of June 27, 2005, as amended, to any agency relating to granting eligibility for access to classified information and conducting investigations shall 13 remain in effect, subject to the exercise of authorities pursuant to this order to revise or revoke such delegation.
(h) If any provision of this order or the application of such provision is held to be invalid, the remainder of this order shall not be affected.
(i) This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13468 of July 24, 2008
2008 Amendments to the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including chapter 47 of title 10, United States Code (Uniform Code of Military Justice, 10 U.S.C. 801-946), and in order to prescribe amendments to the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, prescribed by Executive Order 12473 of April 13, 1984, as amended, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Parts II and IV of the Manual for Courts- Martial, United States, are amended as described in the Annex attached and made a part of this order.
Sec. 2. These amendments shall take effect 30 days from the date of this order.
(a) Nothing in these amendments shall be construed to make punishable any act done or omitted prior to the effective date of this order that was not punishable when done or omitted.
(b) Nothing in these amendments shall be construed to invalidate any nonjudicial punishment proceedings, restraint, investigation, referral of charges, trial in which arraignment occurred, or other action begun prior to the effective date of this order, and any such nonjudicial punishment, restraint, investigation, referral of charges, trial, or other action may proceed in the same manner and with the same effect as if these amendments had not been prescribed.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
July 24, 2008.
Start Printed Page 43828
Start Printed Page 43829
Start Printed Page 43830
Start Printed Page 43831
Start Printed Page 43832
Start Printed Page 43833
Start Printed Page 43834
Start Printed Page 43835
Start Printed Page 43836
Start Printed Page 43837
Start Printed Page 43838
Start Printed Page 43839
Executive Order 13469 of July 25, 2008
Blocking Property of Additional Persons Undermining Democratic Processes or Institutions in Zimbabwe
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code,
I, GEORGE W. BUSH, President of the United States of America, find that the continued actions and policies of the Government of Zimbabwe and other persons to undermine Zimbabwe's democratic processes or institutions, manifested most recently in the fundamentally undemocratic election held on June 27, 2008, to commit acts of violence and other human rights abuses against political opponents, and to engage in public corruption, including by misusing public authority, constitute an unusual and extraor- dinary threat to the foreign policy of the United States, and to deal with that threat, hereby expand the scope of the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13288 of March 6, 2003, and relied upon for additional steps taken in Executive Order 13391 of November 22, 2005, and hereby order:
Section 1. (a) Except to the extent provided by statutes, or provided in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the date of this order, all property and interests in property that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of United States persons, including their overseas branches, of the following persons are blocked and may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in:
Any person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State:
(i) to be a senior official of the Government of Zimbabwe;
(ii) to be owned or controlled by, directly or indirectly, the Government of Zimbabwe or an official or officials of the Government of Zimbabwe;
(iii) to have engaged in actions or policies to undermine Zimbabwe's democratic processes or institutions;
(iv) to be responsible for, or to have participated in, human rights abuses related to political repression in Zimbabwe;
(v) to be engaged in, or to have engaged in, activities facilitating public corruption by senior officials of the Government of Zimbabwe;
(vi) to be a spouse or dependent child of any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to Executive Order 13288, Executive Order 13391, or this order;
(vii) to have materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, logistical, or technical support for, or goods or services in support of, the Government of Zimbabwe, any senior official thereof, or any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to Executive Order 13288, Executive Order 13391, or this order; or (viii) to be owned or controlled by, or to have acted or purported to act for or on behalf Start Printed Page 43842of, directly or indirectly, any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to Executive Order 13288, Executive Order 13391, or this order.
(b) I hereby determine that the making of donations of the type of articles specified in section 203(b)(2) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)) by, to, or for the benefit of any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section would seriously impair my ability to deal with the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13288, as amended, and I hereby prohibit such donations as provided by paragraph (a) of this section.
(c) The prohibitions of this section include but are not limited to (i) the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to Executive Order 13288, Executive Order 13391, or this order, and (ii) the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.
(d) The provisions of Executive Orders 13288 and 13391 remain in effect, and this order does not affect any action taken pursuant to those orders.
Sec. 2. (a) Any transaction by a United States person or within the United States that evades or avoids, has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
(b)Any conspiracy formed to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
Sec. 3. For the purposes of this order:
(a) the term “person” means an individual or entity;
(b) the term “entity” means a partnership, association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization;
(c) the term “United States person” means any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States; and
(d) the term “Government of Zimbabwe” means the Government of Zimbabwe, its agencies, instrumentalities, and controlled entities.
Sec. 4. For those persons whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order who might have a constitutional presence in the United States, I find that, because of the ability to transfer funds or other assets instantaneously, prior notice to such persons of measures to be taken pursuant to this order would render these measures ineffectual. I therefore determine that, for these measures to be effective in addressing the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13288, there need be no prior notice of a listing or determination made pursuant to section 1 of this order.
Sec. 5. The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order. The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government consistent with applicable law. All agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order.
Sec. 6. The Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to submit the recurring and final reports to the Congress on the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13288, as amended, and 5 expanded in this order, consistent with section 401(c) of the NEA (50 U.S.C. 1641(c)) and section 204(c) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1703).Start Printed Page 43843
Sec. 7. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13470 of July 30, 2008
Further Amendments to Executive Order 12333, United States Intelligence Activities
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 (Public Law 108-458), and in order to update and clarify Executive Order 13355 of August 27, 2004, Executive Order 12333 of December 4, 1981, as amended, is hereby further amended as follows:
Section 1. The Preamble to Executive Order 12333, as amended, is further amended by:
(a)
Striking “and” and inserting in lieu thereof a comma before the word “accurate”, and inserting “, and insightful” after the word “accurate” in the first sentence;
(b)
Striking “statutes” and inserting in lieu thereof “the laws” before “of the United States of America” in the third sentence; and
(c)
Striking “the” before “United States intelligence activities” in the third sentence.
Sec. 2. Executive Order 12333, as amended, is further amended by striking Part 1 in its entirety and inserting in lieu thereof the following new part:
PART 1 Goals, Directions, Duties, and Responsibilities with Respect to United States Intelligence Efforts
1.1 Goals. The United States intelligence effort shall provide the President, the National Security Council, and the Homeland Security Council with the necessary information on which to base decisions concerning the development and conduct of foreign, defense, and economic policies, and the protection of United States national interests from foreign security threats.
All departments and agencies shall cooperate fully to fulfill this goal.
(a)
All means, consistent with applicable Federal law and this order, and with full consideration of the rights of United States persons, shall be used to obtain reliable intelligence information to protect the United States and its interests.
(b)
The United States Government has a solemn obligation, and shall continue in the conduct of intelligence activities under this order, to protect fully the legal rights of all United States persons, including freedoms, civil liberties, and privacy rights guaranteed by Federal law.
(c)
Intelligence collection under this order should be guided by the need for information to respond to intelligence priorities set by the President.
(d)
Special emphasis should be given to detecting and countering:
(1)
Espionage and other threats and activities directed by foreign powers or their intelligence services against the United States and its interests;
(2)
Threats to the United States and its interests from terrorism; and
(3)
Threats to the United States and its interests from the development, possession, proliferation, or use of weapons of mass destruction.
(e)
Special emphasis shall be given to the production of timely, accurate, and insightful reports, responsive to decisionmakers in the executive branch, that draw on all appropriate sources of information, including open source Start Printed Page 45326information, meet rigorous analytic standards, consider diverse analytic viewpoints, and accurately represent appropriate alternative views.
(f)
State, local, and tribal governments are critical partners in securing and defending the United States from terrorism and other threats to the United States and its interests.
Our national intelligence effort should take into account the responsibilities and requirements of State, local, and tribal governments and, as appropriate, private sector entities, when undertaking the collection and dissemination of information and intelligence to protect the United States.
(g)
All departments and agencies have a responsibility to prepare and to provide intelligence in a manner that allows the full and free exchange of information, consistent with applicable law and presidential guidance.
1.2 The National Security Council.
(a) Purpose. The National Security Council (NSC) shall act as the highest ranking executive branch entity that provides support to the President for review of, guidance for, and direction to the conduct of all foreign intelligence, counterintelligence, and covert action, and attendant policies and programs.
(b) Covert Action and Other Sensitive Intelligence Operations. The NSC shall consider and submit to the President a policy recommendation, including all dissents, on each proposed covert action and conduct a periodic review of ongoing covert action activities, including an evaluation of the effectiveness and consistency with current national policy of such activities and consistency with applicable legal requirements.
The NSC shall perform such other functions related to covert action as the President may direct, but shall not undertake the conduct of covert actions.
The NSC shall also review proposals for other sensitive intelligence operations.
1.3 Director of National Intelligence. Subject to the authority, direction, and control of the President, the Director of National Intelligence (Director) shall serve as the head of the Intelligence Community, act as the principal adviser to the President, to the NSC, and to the Homeland Security Council for intelligence matters related to national security, and shall oversee and direct the implementation of the National Intelligence Program and execution of the National Intelligence Program budget.
The Director will lead a unified, coordinated, and effective intelligence effort.
In addition, the Director shall, in carrying out the duties and responsibilities under this section, take into account the views of the heads of departments containing an element of the Intelligence Community and of the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency.
(a)
Except as otherwise directed by the President or prohibited by law, the Director shall have access to all information and intelligence described in section 1.5(a) of this order.
For the purpose of access to and sharing of information and intelligence, the Director:
(1)
Is hereby assigned the function under section 3(5) of the Act, to determine that intelligence, regardless of the source from which derived and including information gathered within or outside the United States, pertains to more than one United States Government agency; and
(2)
Shall develop guidelines for how information or intelligence is provided to or accessed by the Intelligence Community in accordance with section 1.5(a) of this order, and for how the information or intelligence may be used and shared by the Intelligence Community.
All guidelines developed in accordance with this section shall be approved by the Attorney General and, where applicable, shall be consistent with guidelines issued pursuant to section 1016 of the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Protection Act of 2004 (Public Law 108-458) (IRTPA).
(b)
In addition to fulfilling the obligations and responsibilities prescribed by the Act, the Director:
(1)
Shall establish objectives, priorities, and guidance for the Intelligence Community to ensure timely and effective collection, processing, analysis, Start Printed Page 45327and dissemination of intelligence, of whatever nature and from whatever source derived;
(2)
May designate, in consultation with affected heads of departments or Intelligence Community elements, one or more Intelligence Community elements to develop and to maintain services of common concern on behalf of the Intelligence Community if the Director determines such services can be more efficiently or effectively accomplished in a consolidated manner;
(3)
Shall oversee and provide advice to the President and the NSC with respect to all ongoing and proposed covert action programs;
(4)
In regard to the establishment and conduct of intelligence arrangements and agreements with foreign governments and international organizations:
(A)
May enter into intelligence and counterintelligence arrangements and agreements with foreign governments and international organizations;
(B)
Shall formulate policies concerning intelligence and counterintelligence arrangements and agreements with foreign governments and international organizations; and
(C)
Shall align and synchronize intelligence and counterintelligence foreign relationships among the elements of the Intelligence Community to further United States national security, policy, and intelligence objectives;
(5)
Shall participate in the development of procedures approved by the Attorney General governing criminal drug intelligence activities abroad to ensure that these activities are consistent with foreign intelligence programs;
(6)
Shall establish common security and access standards for managing and handling intelligence systems, information, and products, with special emphasis on facilitating:
(A)
The fullest and most prompt access to and dissemination of information and intelligence practicable, assigning the highest priority to detecting, preventing, preempting, and disrupting terrorist threats and activities against the United States, its interests, and allies; and
(B)
The establishment of standards for an interoperable information sharing enterprise that facilitates the sharing of intelligence information among elements of the Intelligence Community;
(7)
Shall ensure that appropriate departments and agencies have access to intelligence and receive the support needed to perform independent analysis;
(8)
Shall protect, and ensure that programs are developed to protect, intelligence sources, methods, and activities from unauthorized disclosure;
(9)
Shall, after consultation with the heads of affected departments and agencies, establish guidelines for Intelligence Community elements for:
(A)
Classification and declassification of all intelligence and intelligence-related information classified under the authority of the Director or the authority of the head of a department or Intelligence Community element; and
(B)
Access to and dissemination of all intelligence and intelligence-related information, both in its final form and in the form when initially gathered, to include intelligence originally classified by the head of a department or Intelligence Community element, except that access to and dissemination of information concerning United States persons shall be governed by procedures developed in accordance with Part 2 of this order;
(10)
May, only with respect to Intelligence Community elements, and after consultation with thehead of the originating Intelligence Community element or the head of the originating department, declassify, or direct the declassification of, information or intelligence relating to intelligence Start Printed Page 45328sources, methods, and activities.
The Director may only delegate this authority to the Principal Deputy Director of National Intelligence;
(11)
May establish, operate, and direct one or more national intelligence centers to address intelligence priorities;
(12)
May establish Functional Managers and Mission Managers, and designate officers or employees of the United States to serve in these positions.
(A)
Functional Managers shall report to the Director concerning the execution of their duties as Functional Managers, and may be charged with developing and implementing strategic guidance, policies, and procedures for activities related to a specific intelligence discipline or set of intelligence activities; set training and tradecraft standards; and ensure coordination within and across intelligence disciplines and Intelligence Community elements and with related non-intelligence activities.
Functional Managers may also advise the Director on:
the management of resources; policies and procedures; collection capabilities and gaps; processing and dissemination of intelligence; technical architectures; and other issues or activities determined by the Director.
(i)
The Director of the National Security Agency is designated the Functional Manager for signals intelligence;
(ii)
The Director of the Central Intelligence Agency is designated the Functional Manager for human intelligence; and
(iii)
The Director of the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency is designated the Functional Manager for geospatial intelligence.
(B)
Mission Managers shall serve as principal substantive advisors on all or specified aspects of intelligence related to designated countries, regions, topics, or functional issues;
(13)
Shall establish uniform criteria for the determination of relative priorities for the transmission of critical foreign intelligence, and advise the Secretary of Defense concerning the communications requirements of the Intelligence Community for the transmission of such communications;
(14)
Shall have ultimate responsibility for production and dissemination of intelligence produced by the Intelligence Community and authority to levy analytic tasks on intelligence production organizations within the Intelligence Community, in consultation with the heads of the Intelligence Community elements concerned;
(15)
May establish advisory groups for the purpose of obtaining advice from within the Intelligence Community to carry out the Director's
responsibilities, to include Intelligence Community executive management committees composed of senior Intelligence Community leaders.
Advisory groups shall consist of representatives from elements of the Intelligence Community, as designated by the Director, or other executive branch departments, agencies, and offices, as appropriate;
(16)
Shall ensure the timely exploitation and dissemination of data gathered by national intelligence collection means, and ensure that the resulting intelligence is disseminated immediately to appropriate government elements, including military commands;
(17)
Shall determine requirements and priorities for, and manage and direct the tasking, collection, analysis, production, and dissemination of, national intelligence by elements of the Intelligence Community, including approving requirements for collection and analysis and resolving conflicts in collection requirements and in the tasking of national collection assets of Intelligence Community elements (except when otherwise directed by the President or when the Secretary of Defense exercises collection tasking authority under plans and arrangements approved by the Secretary of Defense and the Director);
(18)
May provide advisory tasking concerning collection and analysis of information or intelligence relevant to national intelligence or national security to departments, agencies, and establishments of the United States Start Printed Page 45329Government that are not elements of
the Intelligence Community; and shall establish procedures, in consultation with affected heads of departments or agencies and subject to approval by the Attorney General, to implement this authority and to monitor or evaluate the responsiveness of United States Government departments, agencies, and other establishments;
(19)
Shall fulfill the responsibilities in section 1.3(b)(17) and (18) of this order, consistent with applicable law and with full consideration of the rights of United States persons, whether information is to be collected inside or outside the United States;
(20)
Shall ensure, through appropriate policies and procedures, the deconfliction, coordination, and integration of all intelligence activities conducted by an Intelligence Community element or funded by the National Intelligence Program.
In accordance with these policies and procedures:
(A)
The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall coordinate the clandestine collection of foreign intelligence collected through human sources or through human-enabled means and counterintelligence activities inside the United States;
(B)
The Director of the Central Intelligence Agency shall coordinate the clandestine collection of foreign intelligence collected through human sources or through human-enabled means and counterintelligence activities outside the United States;
(C)
All policies and procedures for the coordination of counterintelligence activities and the clandestine collection of foreign intelligence inside the United States shall be subject to the approval of the Attorney General; and
(D)
All policies and procedures developed under this section shall be coordinated with the heads of affected departments and Intelligence Community elements;
(21)
Shall, with the concurrence of the heads of affected departments and agencies, establish joint procedures to deconflict, coordinate, and synchronize intelligence activities conducted by an Intelligence Community element or funded by the National Intelligence Program, with intelligence activities, activities that involve foreign intelligence and security services, or activities that involve the use of clandestine methods, conducted by other United States Government departments, agencies, and establishments;
(22)
Shall, in coordination with the heads of departments containing elements of the Intelligence Community, develop procedures to govern major system acquisitions funded in whole or in majority part by the National Intelligence Program;
(23)
Shall seek advice from the Secretary of State to ensure that the foreign policy implications of proposed intelligence activities are considered, and shall ensure, through appropriate policies and procedures, that intelligence activities are conducted in a manner consistent with the responsibilities pursuant to law and presidential direction of Chiefs of United States Missions; and
(24)
Shall facilitate the use of Intelligence Community products by the Congress in a secure manner.
(c)
The Director's exercise of authorities in the Act and this order shall not abrogate the statutory or other responsibilities of the heads of departments of the United States Government or the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency.
Directives issued and actions taken by the Director in the exercise of the Director's authorities and responsibilities to integrate, coordinate, and make the Intelligence Community more effective in providing intelligence related to national security shall be implemented by the elements of the Intelligence Community, provided that any department head whose department contains an element of the Intelligence Community and who believes that a directive or action of the Director violates the requirements of section 1018 of the IRTPA or this subsection shall bring the issue to the attention Start Printed Page 45330of the Director, the NSC, or the President for resolution in a manner that respects and does not abrogate the statutory responsibilities of the heads of the departments.
(d)
Appointments to certain positions.
(1)
The relevant department or bureau head shall provide recommendations and obtain the concurrence of the Director for the selection of:
the Director of the National Security Agency, the Director of the National Reconnaissance Office, the Director of the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, the Under Secretary of Homeland Security for Intelligence and Analysis, the Assistant Secretary of State for Intelligence and Research, the Director of the Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence of the Department of Energy, the Assistant Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis of the Department of the Treasury, and the Executive Assistant Director for the National Security Branch of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
If the Director does not concur in the recommendation, the department head may not fill the vacancy or make the recommendation to the President, as the case may be.
If the department head and the Director do not reach an agreement on the selection or recommendation, the Director and the department head concerned may advise the President directly of the Director's intention to withhold concurrence.
(2)
The relevant department head shall consult with the Director before appointing an individual to fill a vacancy or recommending to the President an individual be nominated to fill a vacancy in any of the following positions:
the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence; the Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency; uniformed heads of the intelligence elements of the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Marine Corps above the rank of Major General or Rear Admiral; the Assistant Commandant of the Coast Guard for Intelligence; and the Assistant Attorney General for National Security.
(e)
Removal from certain positions.
(1)
Except for the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, whose removal the Director may recommend to the President, the Director and the relevant department head shall consult on the removal, or recommendation to the President for removal, as the case may be, of:
the Director of the National Security Agency, the Director of the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, the Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency, the Under Secretary of Homeland Security for Intelligence and Analysis, the Assistant Secretary of State for Intelligence and Research, and the Assistant Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis of the Department of the Treasury.
If the Director and the department head do not agree on removal, or recommendation for removal, either may make a recommendation to the President for the removal of the individual.
(2)
The Director and the relevant department or bureau head shall consult on the removal of:
the Executive Assistant Director for the National Security Branch of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Director of the Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence of the Department of Energy, the Director of the National Reconnaissance Office, the Assistant Commandant of the Coast Guard for Intelligence, and the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence.
With respect to an individual appointed by a department head, the department head may remove the individual upon the request of the Director; if the department head chooses not to remove the individual, either the Director or the department head may advise the President of the department head's intention to retain the individual.
In the case of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, the Secretary of Defense may recommend to the President either the removal or the retention of the individual.
For uniformed heads of the intelligence elements of the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Marine Corps, the Director may make a recommendation for removal to the Secretary of Defense.Start Printed Page 45331
(3)
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to limit or otherwise affect the authority of the President to nominate, appoint, assign, or terminate the appointment or assignment of any individual, with or without a consultation, recommendation, or concurrence.
1.4 The Intelligence Community. Consistent with applicable Federal law and with the other provisions of this order, and under the leadership of the Director, as specified in such law and this order, the Intelligence Community shall:
(a)
Collect and provide information needed by the President and, in the performance of executive functions, the Vice President, the NSC, the Homeland Security Council, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, senior military commanders, and other executive branch officials and, as appropriate, the Congress of the United States;
(b)
In accordance with priorities set by the President, collect information concerning, and conduct activities to protect against, international terrorism, proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, intelligence activities directed against the United States, international criminal drug activities, and other hostile activities directed against the United States by foreign powers, organizations, persons, and their agents;
(c)
Analyze, produce, and disseminate intelligence;
(d)
Conduct administrative, technical, and other support activities within the United States and abroad necessary for the performance of authorized activities, to include providing services of common concern for the Intelligence Community as designated by the Director in accordance with this order;
(e)
Conduct research, development, and procurement of technical systems and devices relating to authorized functions and missions or the provision of services of common concern for the Intelligence Community;
(f)
Protect the security of intelligence related activities, information, installations, property, and employees by appropriate means, including such investigations of applicants, employees, contractors, and other persons with similar associations with the Intelligence Community elements as are necessary;
(g)
Take into account State, local, and tribal governments' and, as appropriate, private sector entities' information needs relating to national and homeland security;
(h)
Deconflict, coordinate, and integrate all intelligence activities and other information gathering in accordance with section 1.3(b)(20) of this order; and
(i)
Perform such other functions and duties related to intelligence activities as the President may direct.
1.5 Duties and Responsibilities of the Heads of Executive Branch Departments and Agencies. The heads of all departments and agencies shall:
(a)
Provide the Director access to all information and intelligence relevant to the national security or that otherwise is required for the performance of the Director's duties, to include administrative and other appropriate management information, except such information excluded by law, by the President, or by the Attorney General acting under this order at the direction of the President;
(b)
Provide all programmatic and budgetary information necessary to support the Director in developing the National Intelligence Program;
(c)
Coordinate development and implementation of intelligence systems and architectures and, as appropriate, operational systems and architectures of their departments, agencies, and other elements with the Director to respond to national intelligence requirements and all applicable information sharing and security guidelines, information privacy, and other legal requirements;Start Printed Page 45332
(d)
Provide, to the maximum extent permitted by law, subject to the availability of appropriations and not inconsistent with the mission of the department or agency, such further support to the Director as the Director may request, after consultation with the head of the department or agency, for the performance of the Director's functions;
(e)
Respond to advisory tasking from the Director under section 1.3(b)(18) of this order to the greatest extent possible, in accordance with applicable policies established by the head of the responding department or agency;
(f)
Ensure that all elements within the department or agency comply with the provisions of Part 2 of this order, regardless of Intelligence Community affiliation, when performing foreign intelligence and counterintelligence functions;
(g)
Deconflict, coordinate, and integrate all intelligence activities in accordance with section 1.3(b)(20), and intelligence and other activities in accordance with section 1.3(b)(21) of this order;
(h)
Inform the Attorney General, either directly or through the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and the Director of clandestine collection of foreign intelligence and counterintelligence activities inside the United States not coordinated with the Federal Bureau of Investigation;
(i)
Pursuant to arrangements developed by the head of the department or agency and the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency and approved by the Director, inform the Director and the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, either directly or through his designee serving outside the United States, as appropriate, of clandestine collection of foreign intelligence collected through human sources or through human-enabled means outside the United States that has not been coordinated with the Central Intelligence Agency; and
(j)
Inform the Secretary of Defense, either directly or through his designee, as appropriate, of clandestine collection of foreign intelligence outside the United States in a region of combat or contingency military operations designated by the Secretary of Defense, for purposes of this paragraph, after consultation with the Director of National Intelligence.
1.6 Heads of Elements of the Intelligence Community. The heads of elements of the Intelligence Community shall:
(a)
Provide the Director access to all information and intelligence relevant to the national security or that otherwise is required for the performance of the Director's duties, to include administrative and other appropriate management information, except such information excluded by law, by the President, or by the Attorney General acting under this order at the direction of the President;
(b)
Report to the Attorney General possible violations of Federal criminal laws by employees and of specified Federal criminal laws by any other person as provided in procedures agreed upon by the Attorney General and the head of the department, agency, or establishment concerned, in a manner consistent with the protection of intelligence sources and methods, as specified in those procedures;
(c)
Report to the Intelligence Oversight Board, consistent with Executive Order 13462 of February 29, 2008, and provide copies of all such reports to the Director, concerning any intelligence activities of their elements that they have reason to believe may be unlawful or contrary to executive order or presidential directive;
(d)
Protect intelligence and intelligence sources, methods, and activities from unauthorized disclosure in accordance with guidance from the Director;
(e)
Facilitate, as appropriate, the sharing of information or intelligence, as directed by law or the President, to State, local, tribal, and private sector entities;Start Printed Page 45333
(f)
Disseminate information or intelligence to foreign governments and international organizations under intelligence or counterintelligence arrangements or agreements established in accordance with section 1.3(b)(4) of this order;
(g)
Participate in the development of procedures approved by the Attorney General governing production and dissemination of information or intelligence resulting from criminal drug intelligence activities abroad if they have intelligence responsibilities for foreign or domestic criminal drug production and trafficking; and
(h)
Ensure that the inspectors general, general counsels, and agency officials responsible for privacy or civil liberties protection for their respective organizations have access to any information or intelligence necessary to perform their official duties.
1.7 Intelligence Community Elements. Each element of the Intelligence Community shall have the duties and responsibilities specified below, in addition to those specified by law or elsewhere in this order.
Intelligence Community elements within executive departments shall serve the information and intelligence needs of their respective heads of departments and also shall operate as part of an integrated Intelligence Community, as provided in law or this order.
(a)
THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.
The Director of the Central Intelligence Agency shall:
(1) Collect (including through clandestine means), analyze, produce, and disseminate foreign intelligence and counterintelligence;
(2)
Conduct counterintelligence activities without assuming or performing any internal security functions within the United States;
(3)
Conduct administrative and technical support activities within and outside the United States as necessary for cover and proprietary arrangements;
(4)
Conduct covert action activities approved by the President.
No agency except the Central Intelligence Agency (or the Armed Forces of the United States in time of war declared by the Congress or during any period covered by a report from the President to the Congress consistent with the War Powers Resolution, Public Law 93-148) may conduct any covert action activity unless the President determines that another agency is more likely to achieve a particular objective;
(5)
Conduct foreign intelligence liaison relationships with intelligence or security services of foreign governments or international organizations consistent with section 1.3(b)(4) of this order;
(6)
Under the direction and guidance of the Director, and in accordance with section 1.3(b)(4) of this order, coordinate the implementation of intelligence and counterintelligence relationships between elements of the Intelligence Community and the intelligence or security services of foreign governments or international organizations; and
(7)
Perform such other functions and duties related to intelligence as the Director may direct.
(b)
THE DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.
The Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency shall:
(1)
Collect (including through clandestine means), analyze, produce, and disseminate foreign intelligence and counterintelligence to support national and departmental missions;
(2)
Collect, analyze, produce, or, through tasking and coordination, provide defense and defense-related intelligence for the Secretary of Defense, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, combatant commanders, other Defense components, and non-Defense agencies;
(3)
Conduct counterintelligence activities;Start Printed Page 45334
(4)
Conduct administrative and technical support activities within and outside the United States as necessary for cover and proprietary arrangements;
(5)
Conduct foreign defense intelligence liaison relationships and defense intelligence exchange programs with foreign defense establishments, intelligence or security services of foreign governments, and international organizations in accordance with sections 1.3(b)(4), 1.7(a)(6), and 1.10(i) of this order;
(6)
Manage and coordinate all matters related to the Defense Attaché system; and
(7)
Provide foreign intelligence and counterintelligence staff support as directed by the Secretary of Defense.
(c)
THE NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY.
The Director of the National Security Agency shall:
(1)
Collect (including through clandestine means), process, analyze, produce, and disseminate signals intelligence information and data for foreign intelligence and counterintelligence purposes to support national and departmental missions;
(2)
Establish and operate an effective unified organization for signals intelligence activities, except for the delegation of operational control over certain operations that are conducted through other elements of the Intelligence Community.
No other department or agency may engage in signals intelligence activities except pursuant to a delegation by the Secretary of Defense, after coordination with the Director;
(3)
Control signals intelligence collection and processing activities, including assignment of resources to an appropriate agent for such periods and tasks as required for the direct support of military commanders;
(4)
Conduct administrative and technical support activities within and outside the United States as necessary for cover arrangements;
(5)
Provide signals intelligence support for national and departmental requirements and for the conduct of military operations;
(6)
Act as the National Manager for National Security Systems as established in law and policy, and in this capacity be responsible to the Secretary of Defense and to the Director;
(7)
Prescribe, consistent with section 102A(g) of the Act, within its field of authorized operations, security regulations covering operating practices, including the transmission, handling, and distribution of signals intelligence and communications security material within and among the elements under control of the Director of the National Security Agency, and exercise the necessary supervisory control to ensure compliance with the regulations; and
(8)
Conduct foreign cryptologic liaison relationships in accordance with sections 1.3(b)(4), 1.7(a)(6), and 1.10(i) of this order.
(d)
THE NATIONAL RECONNAISSANCE OFFICE.
The Director of the National Reconnaissance Office shall:
(1)
Be responsible for research and development, acquisition, launch, deployment, and operation of overhead systems and related data processing facilities to collect intelligence and information to support national and departmental missions and other United States Government needs; and
(2)
Conduct foreign liaison relationships relating to the above missions, in accordance with sections 1.3(b)(4), 1.7(a)(6), and 1.10(i) of this order.
(e)
THE NATIONAL GEOSPATIAL-INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.
The Director of the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency shall:
(1)
Collect, process, analyze, produce, and disseminate geospatial intelligence information and data for foreign intelligence and counterintelligence purposes to support national and departmental missions;Start Printed Page 45335
(2)
Provide geospatial intelligence support for national and departmental requirements and for the conduct of military operations;
(3)
Conduct administrative and technical support activities within and outside the United States as necessary for cover arrangements; and
(4)
Conduct foreign geospatial intelligence liaison relationships, in accordance with sections 1.3(b)(4), 1.7(a)(6), and 1.10(i) of this order.
(f)
THE INTELLIGENCE AND COUNTERINTELLIGENCE ELEMENTS OF THE ARMY, NAVY, AIR FORCE, AND MARINE CORPS.
The Commanders and heads of the intelligence and counterintelligence elements of the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps shall:
(1)
Collect (including through clandestine means), produce, analyze, and disseminate defense and defense-related intelligence and counterintelligence to support departmental requirements, and, as appropriate, national requirements;
(2)
Conduct counterintelligence activities;
(3)
Monitor the development, procurement, and management of tactical intelligence systems and equipment and conduct related research, development, and test and evaluation activities; and
(4)
Conduct military intelligence liaison relationships and military intelligence exchange programs with selected cooperative foreign defense establishments and international organizations in accordance with sections 1.3(b)(4), 1.7(a)(6), and 1.10(i) of this order.
(g)
INTELLIGENCE ELEMENTS OF THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION.
Under the supervision of the Attorney General and pursuant to such regulations as the Attorney General may establish, the intelligence elements of the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall:
(1)
Collect (including through clandestine means), analyze, produce, and disseminate foreign intelligence and counterintelligence to support national and departmental missions, in accordance with procedural guidelines approved by the Attorney General, after consultation with the Director;
(2)
Conduct counterintelligence activities; and
(3)
Conduct foreign intelligence and counterintelligence liaison relationships with intelligence, security, and law enforcement services of foreign governments or international organizations in accordance with sections 1.3(b)(4) and 1.7(a)(6) of this order.
(h)
THE INTELLIGENCE AND COUNTERINTELLIGENCE ELEMENTS OF THE COAST GUARD.
The Commandant of the Coast Guard shall:
(1)
Collect (including through clandestine means), analyze, produce, and disseminate foreign intelligence and counterintelligence including defense and defense-related information and intelligence to support national and departmental missions;
(2)
Conduct counterintelligence activities;
(3)
Monitor the development, procurement, and management of tactical intelligence systems and equipment and conduct related research, development, and test and evaluation activities; and
(4)
Conduct foreign intelligence liaison relationships and intelligence exchange programs with foreign intelligence services, security services or international organizations in accordance with sections 1.3(b)(4), 1.7(a)(6), and, when operating as part of the Department of Defense, 1.10(i) of this order.
(i)
THE BUREAU OF INTELLIGENCE AND RESEARCH, DEPARTMENT OF STATE; THE OFFICE OF INTELLIGENCE AND ANALYSIS, DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY; THE OFFICE OF NATIONAL SECURITY INTELLIGENCE, DRUG ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATION; THE OFFICE OF INTELLIGENCE AND ANALYSIS, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY; AND THE OFFICE OF INTELLIGENCE AND COUNTERINTELLIGENCE, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY.
The heads of the Bureau of Intelligence and Start Printed Page 45336Research, Department of State; the Office of Intelligence and Analysis, Department of the Treasury; the Office of National Security Intelligence, Drug Enforcement Administration; the Office of Intelligence and Analysis, Department of Homeland Security; and the Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence, Department of Energy shall:
(1)
Collect (overtly or through publicly available sources), analyze, produce, and disseminate information, intelligence, and counterintelligence to support national and departmental missions; and
(2)
Conduct and participate in analytic or information exchanges with foreign partners and international organizations in accordance with sections 1.3(b)(4) and 1.7(a)(6) of this order.
(j)
THE OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE. The Director shall collect (overtly or through publicly available sources), analyze, produce, and disseminate information, intelligence, and counterintelligence to support the missions of the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, including the National Counterterrorism Center, and to support other national missions.
1.8 The Department of State. In addition to the authorities exercised by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research under sections 1.4 and 1.7(i) of this order, the Secretary of State shall:
(a)
Collect (overtly or through publicly available sources) information relevant to United States foreign policy and national security concerns;
(b)
Disseminate, to the maximum extent possible, reports received from United States diplomatic and consular posts;
(c)
Transmit reporting requirements and advisory taskings of the Intelligence Community to the Chiefs of United States Missions abroad; and
(d)
Support Chiefs of United States Missions in discharging their responsibilities pursuant to law and presidential direction.
1.9 The Department of the Treasury. In addition to the authorities exercised by the Office of Intelligence and Analysis of the Department of the Treasury under sections 1.4 and 1.7(i) of this order the Secretary of the Treasury shall collect (overtly or through publicly available sources) foreign financial information and, in consultation with the Department of State, foreign economic information.
1.10 The Department of Defense. The Secretary of Defense shall:
(a)
Collect (including through clandestine means), analyze, produce, and disseminate information and intelligence and be responsive to collection tasking and advisory tasking by the Director;
(b)
Collect (including through clandestine means), analyze, produce, and disseminate defense and defense-related intelligence and counterintelligence, as required for execution of the Secretary's responsibilities;
(c)
Conduct programs and missions necessary to fulfill national, departmental, and tactical intelligence requirements;
(d)
Conduct counterintelligence activities in support of Department of Defense components and coordinate counterintelligence activities in accordance with section 1.3(b)(20) and (21) of this order;
(e)
Act, in coordination with the Director, as the executive agent of the United States Government for signals intelligence activities;
(f)
Provide for the timely transmission of critical intelligence, as defined by the Director, within the United States Government;
(g)
Carry out or contract for research, development, and procurement of technical systems and devices relating to authorized intelligence functions;
(h)
Protect the security of Department of Defense installations, activities, information, property, and employees by appropriate means, including such investigations of applicants, employees, contractors, and other persons with similar associations with the Department of Defense as are necessary;Start Printed Page 45337
(i)
Establish and maintain defense intelligence relationships and defense intelligence exchange programs with selected cooperative foreign defense establishments, intelligence or security services of foreign governments, and international organizations, and ensure that such relationships and programs are in accordance with sections 1.3(b)(4), 1.3(b)(21) and 1.7(a)(6) of this order;
(j)
Conduct such administrative and technical support activities within and outside the United States as are necessary to provide for cover and proprietary arrangements, to perform the functions described in sections (a) though (i) above, and to support the Intelligence Community elements of the Department of Defense; and
(k)
Use the Intelligence Community elements within the Department of Defense identified in section 1.7(b) through (f) and, when the Coast Guard is operating as part of the Department of Defense, (h) above to carry out the Secretary of Defense's responsibilities assigned in this section or other departments, agencies, or offices within the Department of Defense, as appropriate, to conduct the intelligence missions and responsibilities assigned to the Secretary of Defense.
1.11 The Department of Homeland Security. In addition to the authorities exercised by the Office of Intelligence and Analysis of the Department of Homeland Security under sections 1.4 and 1.7(i) of this order, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall conduct, through the United States Secret Service, activities to determine the existence and capability of surveillance equipment being used against the President or the Vice President of the United States, the Executive Office of the President, and, as authorized by the Secretary of Homeland Security or the President, other Secret Service protectees and United States officials.
No information shall be acquired intentionally through such activities except to protect against use of such surveillance equipment, and those activities shall be conducted pursuant to procedures agreed upon by the Secretary of Homeland Security and the Attorney General.
1.12 The Department of Energy. In addition to the authorities exercised by the Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence of the Department of Energy under sections 1.4 and 1.7(i) of this order, the Secretary of Energy shall:
(a)
Provide expert scientific, technical, analytic, and research capabilities to other agencies within the Intelligence Community, as appropriate;
(b)
Participate in formulating intelligence collection and analysis requirements where the special expert capability of the Department can contribute; and
(c)
Participate with the Department of State in overtly collecting information with respect to foreign energy matters.
1.13 The Federal Bureau of Investigation. In addition to the authorities exercised by the intelligence elements of the Federal Bureau of Investigation of the Department of Justice under sections 1.4 and 1.7(g) of this order and under the supervision of the Attorney General and pursuant to such regulations as the Attorney General may establish, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall provide technical assistance, within or outside the United States, to foreign intelligence and law enforcement services, consistent with section 1.3(b)(20) and (21) of this order, as may be necessary to support national or departmental missions.
Sec. 3. Part 2 of Executive Order 12333, as amended, is further amended by:
(a)
In section 2.1, striking the first sentence and inserting in lieu thereof:
“Timely, accurate, and insightful information about the activities, capabilities, plans, and intentions of foreign powers, organizations, and persons, and their agents, is essential to informed decisionmaking in the areas of national security, national defense, and foreign relations.“;
(b)
In section 2.1, inserting a comma after “innovative”;Start Printed Page 45338
(c)
In section 2.2, inserting “, the spread of weapons of mass destruction,“ after “international terrorist activities” in the first sentence;
(d)
In the first sentence of section 2.3, striking “Agencies within the” and inserting in lieu thereof “Elements of the”, inserting a comma after “retain”, striking “agency” and inserting in lieu thereof “Intelligence Community element”, and inserting “or by the head of a department containing such element” after “concerned”;
(e)
In section 2.3, inserting “, after consultation with the Director” preceding the period at the end of the first sentence;
(f)
In section 2.3, inserting a comma after “retention” in the second sentence;
(g)
In section 2.3(b), striking “FBI” and inserting in lieu thereof “Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)”;
(h)
In section 2.3(b), striking “agencies” and inserting in lieu thereof “elements” each time it appears;
(i)
In section 2.3(c), striking “narcotics” and inserting in lieu thereof “drug,”;
(j)
In section 2.3(d), inserting a comma after “victims”;
(k)
In section 2.3(e), striking “sources or methods” and inserting in lieu thereof “sources, methods, and activities”;
(l)
In section 2.3(e), striking “agencies” and inserting in lieu thereof “elements” and striking “agency” and inserting in lieu thereof “element”;
(m)
In section 2.3(g), inserting a comma after “physical”;
(n)
In section 2.3(h), striking “and”;
(o)
In section 2.3(i), striking “federal” and inserting in lieu thereof “Federal” and inserting a comma after “local”;
(p)
In the last sentence of section 2.3, striking “agencies within” and inserting in lieu thereof “elements of”, striking “, other than information derived from signals intelligence,”, striking “agency” and inserting in lieu thereof “element” in both instances and inserting immediately before the period:
“, except that information derived from signals intelligence may only be disseminated or made available to Intelligence Community elements in accordance with procedures established by the Director in coordination with the Secretary of Defense and approved by the Attorney General”;
(q)
In the first three sentences of section 2.4, striking “Agencies within” and inserting in lieu thereof “Elements of”; striking “Agencies” and inserting in lieu thereof ”Elements of the Intelligence Community”; and striking “agency” and inserting in lieu thereof “Intelligence Community element concerned or the head of a department containing such element”;
(r)
In the second sentence of section 2.4, inserting “, after consultation with the Director“ after “Attorney General”;
(s)
In section 2.4(a), striking “CIA” and inserting in lieu thereof “Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)”;
(t)
In section 2.4(b) and (c), striking “agencies” and inserting in lieu thereof “elements of the Intelligence Community”.
(u)
In section 2.4(b)(2), striking the period and inserting in lieu thereof a semicolon;
(v)
In section 2.4(c)(1), striking “agency” and inserting in lieu thereof “element”;
(w)
In section 2.4(c)(2), striking the period and inserting in lieu thereof “; and”;
(x)
In section 2.4(d) striking “than” and inserting in lieu thereof “that”;
(y)
In section 2.5, striking the final sentence and inserting in lieu thereof “The authority delegated pursuant to this paragraph, including the authority Start Printed Page 45339to approve the use of electronic surveillance as defined in the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978, as amended, shall be exercised in accordance with that Act.”;
(z)
In section 2.6, inserting “and other Civil” before “Authorities” in the caption and striking “Agencies within” and inserting in lieu thereof “Elements of”;
(aa)
In section 2.6(a), inserting a comma after “property” and striking “agency” and inserting in lieu thereof “element”;
(bb)
In section 2.6(c), striking “General Counsel” and inserting in lieu thereof “general counsel”, and striking “agency” and inserting in lieu thereof “element or department” in the second sentence;
(cc)
In section 2.6(d), inserting “or other civil” before “authorities”;
(dd)
In section 2.7, striking “Agencies within” and inserting in lieu thereof “Elements of”;
(ee)
In section 2.9, striking “agencies within” and inserting in lieu thereof “elements of”, and striking “agency within” and inserting in lieu thereof “element of” the first time it appears and “Intelligence Community element” the second and third times it appears;
(ff)
In section 2.9, striking “his” and inserting in lieu thereof “such person's”;
(gg)
In section 2.9, inserting “or the head of a department containing such element” before “and approved by the Attorney General“, and inserting ”, after consultation with the Director” after “the Attorney General”;
(hh)
In section 2.10, striking “agency within” and inserting in lieu thereof “element of”, and inserting a comma after “contract for”;
(ii)
In section 2.12, striking “agency” and inserting in lieu thereof “element”; and
(jj)
At the end of Part 2, inserting a new section 2.13 as follows:
“2.13 Limitation on Covert Action.
No covert action may be conducted which is intended to influence United States political processes, public opinion, policies, or media.”.
Sec. 4. Part 3 of Executive Order 12333, as amended, is further amended by:
(a)
In section 3.1, striking “of Central Intelligence”; inserting
“elements,” after “agencies,”; and striking “special” and inserting in lieu thereof “covert action”;
(b)
Striking section 3.2 and inserting in lieu thereof:
“3.2 Implementation.
The President, supported by the NSC, and the Director shall issue such appropriate directives, procedures, and guidance as are necessary to implement this order.
Heads of elements within the Intelligence Community shall issue appropriate procedures and supplementary directives consistent with this order.
No procedures to implement Part 2 of this order shall be issued without the Attorney General's approval, after consultation with the Director.
The Attorney General shall provide a statement of reasons for not approving any procedures established by the head of an element in the Intelligence Community (or the head of the department containing such element) other than the FBI.
In instances where the element head or department head and the Attorney General are unable to reach agreements on other than constitutional or other legal grounds, the Attorney General, the head of department concerned, or the Director shall refer the matter to the NSC.”;
(c)
Striking section 3.3 and inserting in lieu thereof: “ 3.3 Procedures. The activities herein authorized that require procedures shall be conducted in accordance with existing procedures or requirements established under Executive Order 12333.
New procedures, as required by Executive Order 12333, as further amended, shall be established as expeditiously as possible.
All new procedures promulgated pursuant to Executive Order 12333, as amended, shall be made available to the Select Committee on Intelligence Start Printed Page 45340of the Senate and the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of Representatives.”;
(d)
Inserting after section 3.3 the following new section:
“ 3.4 References and Transition. References to “Senior Officials of the Intelligence Community” or “SOICs” in executive orders or other Presidential guidance, shall be deemed references to the heads of elements in the Intelligence Community, unless the President otherwise directs; references in Intelligence Community or Intelligence Community element policies or guidance, shall be deemed to be references to the heads of elements of the Intelligence Community, unless the President or the Director otherwise directs.”;
(e)
Striking “3.4 Definitions” and inserting in lieu thereof “3.5 Definitions”;
(f)
Amending the definition of “ Counterintelligence” in section 3.5(a), as renumbered, by inserting “identify, deceive, exploit, disrupt, or” before “protect against espionage”, inserting “or their agents,” after “persons,”, inserting “organizations or activities” after terrorist, and striking “activities, but not including personnel, physical, document or communications security programs”;
(g)
Striking section 3.5(b)-(h), as renumbered, and inserting in lieu thereof:
“(b) Covert action means an activity or activities of the United States Government to influence political, economic, or military conditions abroad, where it is intended that the role of the United States Government
will not be apparent or acknowledged publicly, but does not include:
(1)
Activities the primary purpose of which is to acquire intelligence, traditional counterintelligence activities, traditional activities to improve or maintain the operational security of United States Government programs, or administrative activities;
(2)
Traditional diplomatic or military activities or routine support to such activities;
(3)
Traditional law enforcement activities conducted by United States Government law enforcement agencies or routine support to such activities; or
(4)
Activities to provide routine support to the overt activities (other than activities described in paragraph (1), (2), or (3)) of other United States Government agencies abroad.
(c) Electronic surveillance means acquisition of a nonpublic communication by electronic means without the consent of a person who is a party to an electronic communication or, in the case of a nonelectronic communication, without the consent of a person who is visibly present at the place of communication, but not including the use of radio direction-finding equipment solely to determine the location of a transmitter.
(d) Employee means a person employed by, assigned or detailed to, or acting for an element within the Intelligence Community.
(e) Foreign intelligence means information relating to the capabilities, intentions, or activities of foreign governments or elements thereof, foreign organizations, foreign persons, or international terrorists.
(f) Intelligence includes foreign intelligence and counterintelligence.
(g) Intelligence activities means all activities that elements of the Intelligence Community are authorized to conduct pursuant to this order.
(h) Intelligence Community and elements of the Intelligence Community refers to:
(1)
The Office of the Director of National Intelligence;
(2)
The Central Intelligence Agency;
(3)
The National Security Agency;
(4)
The Defense Intelligence Agency;
(5)
The National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency;
(6)
The National Reconnaissance Office;
(7)
The other offices within the Department of Defense for the collection of specialized national foreign intelligence through reconnaissance programs;Start Printed Page 45341
(8)
The intelligence and counterintelligence elements of the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Marine Corps;
(9)
The intelligence elements of the Federal Bureau of Investigation;
(10)
The Office of National Security Intelligence of the Drug Enforcement Administration;
(11)
The Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence of the Department of Energy;
(12)
The Bureau of Intelligence and Research of the Department of State;
(13)
The Office of Intelligence and Analysis of the Department of the Treasury;
(14)
The Office of Intelligence and Analysis of the Department of Homeland Security;
(15)
The intelligence and counterintelligence elements of the Coast Guard; and
(16)
Such other elements of any department or agency as may be designated by the President, or designated jointly by the Director and the head of the department or agency concerned, as an element of the Intelligence Community.
(i) National Intelligence and Intelligence Related to National Security means all intelligence, regardless of the source from which derived and including information gathered within or outside the United States, that pertains, as determined consistent with any guidance issued by the President, or that is determined for the purpose of access to information by the Director in accordance with section 1.3(a)(1) of this order, to pertain to more than one United States Government agency; and that involves threats to the United States, its people, property, or interests; the development, proliferation, or use of weapons of mass destruction; or any other matter bearing on United States national or homeland security.
(j) The National Intelligence Program means all programs, projects, and activities of the Intelligence Community, as well as any other programs of the Intelligence Community designated jointly by the Director and the head of a United States department or agency or by the President.
Such term does not include programs, projects, or activities of the military departments to acquire intelligence solely for the planning and conduct of tactical military operations by United States Armed Forces.”.
(h)
Redesignating the definition of “ United States Person” as section 3.5(k) and therein striking “agency” and inserting in lieu thereof “element”;
(i)
Striking section 3.5;
(j)
In section 3.6, striking “Order No. 12036 of January 24, 1978, as amended, entitled “United States Intelligence Activities,” is” and inserting in lieu thereof “Orders 13354 and 13355 of August 27, 2004, are”, and inserting before the period “; and paragraphs 1.3(b)(9) and (10) of Part 1 supersede provisions within Executive Order 12958, as amended, to the extent such provisions in Executive Order 12958, as amended, are inconsistent with this Order”; and
(k)
Inserting the following new section 3.7 to read as follows:
“3.7 General Provisions.
(a)
Consistent with section 1.3(c) of this order, nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(1)
Authority granted by law to a department or agency, or the head thereof; or
(2)
Functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(b)
This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(c)
This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, and does not, create any Start Printed Page 45342right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.”.
Sec. 5. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable by any party at law or in equity against the United States, its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13471 of
August 28, 2008
Further Amendments To Executive Order 13285, President's Council On Service And Civic Participation
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, and in order to increase the membership and extend the duration of the President's Council on Service and Civic Participation, it is hereby ordered that Executive Order 13285 of January 29, 2003, as amended, is further amended as follows:
Section 1. Section 1 is amended by adding at the end of section 1 the following new subsection:
“(c)
To conduct and vote on official business during meetings, the Council must convene a quorum of at least 10 Council members.”
Sec. 2. Section 4(b) is amended to read:
“(b) Unless further extended by the President, this order shall expire on June 30, 2009.”
Sec. 3. Section 4 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
“(c)
This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.”
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13472 of September 11, 2008
Executive Branch Responsibilities With Respect To Orders of Succession
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy.
It is the policy of the Federal Government to ensure that each executive branch agency can perform its essential functions and remain an effectively functioning part of the Federal Government under all conditions.
Accordingly, each agency shall take all appropriate actions to establish, maintain, and, as necessary, revise an order of succession, or to propose presidential action to establish or revise an order of succession.
Sec. 2.
Definitions.
As used in this order:
(a)
“agency” means:
(i)
an executive agency as defined in section 105 of title 5, United States Code, other than the Government Accountability Office; and
(ii)
the United States Postal Service and the Postal Regulatory Commission; and
(b)
“order of succession” means a list of officials by position who shall act as and perform the functions and duties of the office of the head of the agency in the event that the office-holder has died, resigned, or otherwise become unable to perform the functions and duties of the office.
“Order of succession” does not include any order, rule, memorandum, or other document delegating or partially delegating the authority of an office.
Sec. 3.
Orders of Succession Requiring Presidential Action.
(a)
Each agency for which presidential action is required to establish an order of succession shall draft a proposed order of
succession if no such order exists and, not later than 30 days from the date of this order, send such proposed draft order to the Counsel to the President for review and comment.
(b)
Each agency described in subsection 3(a) of this order shall send any proposed updates or revisions to the agency's order of succession to the Counsel to the President for review and comment.
(c)
Upon completion of the requirements set forth by subsections (a) or (b) of this section with respect to a proposed order, the agency shall submit the proposed order to the Office of Management and Budget in accordance with Executive Order 11030, as amended.
Sec. 4.
Orders of Succession Not Requiring Presidential Action.
(a)
Each agency for which presidential action is not required to establish an order of succession because of the agency's existing legal authority shall establish and maintain such order in accordance with applicable law and any applicable guidance issued by the President or the Secretary of Homeland Security, including the laws and guidance regarding continuity plans and programs for the executive branch.
(b)
Each agency described in subsection 4(a) of this order shall update and revise its order of succession as necessary.
Before implementing any revisions to its order of succession, such agency shall send the proposed revisions to the Counsel to the President for review and comment.
(c)
Not later than 30 days from the date of this order, and not later than 7 days from the issuance date of any subsequent final revision Start Printed Page 53354to an existing order of succession, each agency described in subsection 4(a) of this order shall provide a copy of its order of succession to the Counsel to the President,
the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and Counterterrorism, and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget.
Sec. 5.
General Provisions.
(a)
Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(i)
authority granted by law to a department, agency, or the head thereof; or
(ii)
functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(b)
Nothing in this order shall be construed to delegate the President's authority under the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, 5 U.S.C. 3345 et seq., to designate individuals to perform the functions and duties of a vacant office temporarily in an acting capacity.
(c)
This order shall be implemented in a manner consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(d)
This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13473 of September 25, 2008
To Authorize Certain Noncompetitive Appointments in the Civil Service for Spouses of Certain Members of the Armed Forces
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including sections 3301 and 3302 of title 5, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy.
It shall be the policy of the United States to provide for the appropriately expedited recruitment and selection of spouses of members of the Armed Forces for appointment to positions in the competitive service of the Federal civil service as part of the effort of the United States to recruit and retain in military service, skilled and experienced members of the Armed Forces and to recognize and honor the service of such members injured, disabled, or killed in connection with their service.
Sec. 2.
Definitions.
As used in this order:
(a)
the term “agency” has the meaning specified for the term “executive agency” in section 105 of title 5, United States Code, but does not include the Government Accountability Office;
(b)
the term “Armed Forces” has the meaning specified for that term in section 101 of title 10, United States Code;
(c)
the term “active duty” means full-time duty in an armed force and includes full-time National Guard duty, except that, for Reserve Component members, the term “active duty” does not include training duties or attendance at service schools.
(d)
the term “permanent change of station” means the assignment, detail, or transfer of a member of the Armed Forces serving at a present permanent duty station to a different permanent duty station under a competent authorization or order that does not:
(i)
specify the duty as temporary;
(ii)
provide for assignment, detail, or transfer, after that different permanent duty station, to a further different permanent duty station; or (iii)
direct return to the present permanent duty station; and
(e)
the term “totally disabled retired or separated member” means a member of the Armed Forces who:
(i)
retired under chapter 61 of title 10, United States Code, with a disability rating at the time of retirement of 100 per cent; or (ii)
retired or separated from the Armed Forces and has a disability rating of 100 percent from the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Sec. 3.
Noncompetitive Appointment Authority.
Consistent with the policy set forth in section 1 of this order and such regulations as the Director of the Office of Personnel Management may prescribe, the head of an agency may make a noncompetitive appointment to any position in the competitive service, for which the individual is qualified, of an individual who is:
(a)
the spouse of a member of the Armed Forces who, as determined by the Secretary of Defense, is performing active duty pursuant to orders that authorize a permanent change of station move, if such spouse relocates to the member's new permanent duty station;
(b)
the spouse of a totally disabled retired or separated member of the Armed Forces; orStart Printed Page 56704
(c)
the unremarried widow or widower of a member of the Armed Forces killed while performing active duty.
Sec. 4.
Administrative Provisions.
The heads of agencies shall employ, as appropriate, appointment authority available to them, in addition to the authority granted by section 3 of this order, to carry out the policy set forth in section 1.
Sec. 5.
General Provisions.
(a)
Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(i)
authority granted by law to a department or agency or the head thereof; and
(ii)
functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative functions.
(b)
This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13474 of September 26, 2008
Amendments to Executive Order 12962
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to conserve, restore, and enhance aquatic systems to provide for increased recreational fishing opportunities nationwide, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Executive Order 12962 of June 7, 1995, is hereby amended:
(a) in the preamble, by striking “and the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act (16 U.S.C 1801-1882)” and inserting before “, and other pertinent statutes,” the following:
“the National Marine Sanctuaries Act of 1972 (16 U.S.C. 1431 et seq.), the National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act of 1966 (16 U.S.C. 668dd-ee), the National Park Service Organic Act (16 U.S.C. 1 et seq.), the National Historic Preservation Act (16 U.S.C. 470 et seq.), Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.), the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act (16 U.S.C. 1801 et seq.), the Coastal Zone Management Act (16 U.S.C. 1451 et seq.), the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1331 et seq.)”; and
(b) by redesignating subsections (d) through (i) in section 1 as subsections (e) through (j), respectively, and inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsection:
“(d) ensuring that recreational fishing shall be managed as a sustainable activity in national wildlife refuges, national parks, national monuments, national marine sanctuaries, marine protected areas, or any other relevant conservation or
management areas or activities under any Federal authority, consistent with applicable law;”.
Start Printed Page 57230
Sec. 2. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13475 of October 7, 2008
Further Amendments To Executive Orders 12139 And 12949 In Light of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 Amendments Act of 2008
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including sections 104 and 303 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 (50 U.S.C. 1801 et seq.), as amended by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 Amendments Act of 2008 (Public Law 110-261), it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Section 1-103 of Executive Order 12139 of May 23, 1979, as amended, is further amended by:
(a)
striking “(7)” each place it appears and inserting in lieu thereof “(6)”;
(b)
adding after subsection (h) “(i) Deputy Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.”; and
(c)
by adding after the sentence that begins “None of the above officials . . .”, a new sentence to read “The requirement of the preceding sentence that the named official must be appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate does not apply to the Deputy Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.”
Sec. 2. Section 3 of Executive Order 12949 of February 9, 1995, as amended, is further amended by:
(a)
striking “(7)” each place it appears and inserting in lieu thereof “(6)”;
(b)
striking “and” at the end of subsection (g);
(c)
striking the period at the end of subsection (h) and inserting in lieu thereof “; and”;
(d)
adding after subsection (h) “(i) Deputy Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.”; and
(e)
by adding after the sentence that begins “None of the above officials . . .”, a new sentence to read “The requirement of the preceding sentence that the named official must be appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate does not apply to the Deputy Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.”
Start Printed Page 60096
Sec. 3. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13476 of October 9, 2008
Facilitation of a Presidential Transition
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 7301 of title 5, United States Code, and the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 (Public Law 108-458) (IRTPA), and in order to further the purposes of the Presidential Transition Act of 1963, as amended, and to assist the presidential transition, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Presidential Transition Coordination.
(a)
To assist and support the transition efforts of the transition teams for the “major party” “candidates,” as those terms are used in the IRTPA and defined in section 9002(2) and (6) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 9002(2), (6)), and the President-elect, there is established a Presidential Transition Coordinating Council (Council).
(b)
The Council shall be composed of the following officials or their designees:
(i)
Chief of Staff to the President, who shall serve as Chair;
(ii)
Assistant to the President and Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations, who shall serve as Vice Chair;
(iii)
Assistant to the President and Deputy Chief of Staff for Policy;
(iv)
Counsel to the President;
(v)
Assistant to the President for Presidential Personnel;
(vi)
Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs;
(vii)
Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and Counterterrorism;
(viii) Assistant to the President for Economic Policy and Director, National Economic Council;
(ix)
Attorney General;
(x)
Director of National Intelligence;
(xi)
Director of the Office of Management and Budget;
(xii)
Director of the Office of Personnel Management;
(xiii) Administrator of General Services;
(xiv)
Archivist of the United States;
(xv)
Director of the Office of Government Ethics; and
(xvi)
Such others as the President or the Chair of the Council may select.
(c)
The Council shall assist the major party candidates and the President-elect by making every reasonable effort to facilitate the transition between administrations.
This assistance may include, among other things, providing information relevant to facilitating the personnel aspects of a presidential transition and such other information that, in the Council's judgment, is useful and appropriate, as long as providing such information is not otherwise prohibited by law.
(d)
In order to obtain a wide range of facts and information on prior transitions and best practices, the Council, its members, or their designees may, from time to time, seek information from private individuals, including Start Printed Page 60606individuals within outside organizations, who have significant experience or expertise in presidential transitions.
The Council, its members, or their designees shall endeavor to obtain such facts and information from individuals representing a range of bipartisan or nonpartisan viewpoints.
If the Council, its members, or their designees find it necessary to seek advice from private individuals or outside organizations, such counsel should be sought in a manner that seeks individual advice and does not involve collective judgment or deliberation.
(e)
It shall be the policy of the Council to provide appropriate information and assistance to the major party candidates on an equal basis and without regard for party affiliation.
Sec. 2.
Transition Activities and Materials.
(a)
At the direction of the Council or its designee(s), the Administrator of General Services shall coordinate orientation activities with the appropriate agencies, including the Office of Government Ethics and the Office of Personnel Management, for key prospective presidential appointees.
(b)
At the direction of the Council or its designee(s), the White House Office of Presidential Personnel shall supplement as appropriate and necessary the electronic record of all title 5 presidentially appointed positions provided by the Office of Personnel Management to the major party candidates pursuant to section 8403(b) of IRTPA.
(c)
The Suitability and Security Clearance Performance Accountability Council shall coordinate with the Council when performing those functions authorized by Executive Order 13467 of June 30, 2008, that are necessary to assist in transition-related activities.
(d)
At the direction of the Council or its designee(s), executive departments and agencies shall prepare a set of briefing materials for new political appointees before the inauguration of the President-elect.
The current Administration shall work with the incoming transition team to provide copies of all such materials.
(e)
At the direction of the Council or its designee(s) and consistent with the Presidential Transition Act of 1963, as amended, the Administrator of General Services, in consultation
with the Archivist of the United States and other appropriate agencies, shall develop a Transition Directory.
This directory shall include Federal publications and other materials that provide information on each executive department and agency.
Sec. 3.
Transition Agreements.
To assist and support the transition, transition agreements between the White House or appropriate executive branch departments and agencies and the transition teams for the major party candidates and the President-elect will be entered into, as necessary, regarding transition procedures and identification of transition contacts.
Sec. 4.
General Provisions.
(a)
In order to take appropriate account of the transition reforms made by IRTPA and to further update and clarify the presidential transition process, this order supersedes Executive Order 13176 of November 27, 2000.
(b)
Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(i)
authority granted by law to a department or agency, or the head thereof; or
(ii)
functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
Start Printed Page 60607
(c)
This order is intended only to facilitate the transition and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
(d)
Unless extended by the President, this order shall expire on February 20, 2009.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13477 of October 31, 2008
Settlement of Claims Against Libya
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and pursuant to the August 14, 2008, claims settlement agreement between the United States of America and Libya
(Claims Settlement Agreement), and in recognition of the October 31, 2008, certification of the Secretary of State, pursuant to section 5(a)(2) of the Libyan Claims Resolution Act (Public Law 110-301), and in order to continue the process of normalizing relations between the United States and Libya, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. All claims within the terms of Article I of the Claims Settlement Agreement (Article I) are settled.
(a)
Claims of United States nationals within the terms of Article I are espoused by the United States and are settled according to the terms of the Claims Settlement Agreement.
(i)
No United States national may assert or maintain any claim within the terms of Article I in any forum, domestic or foreign, except under the procedures provided for by the Secretary of State.
(ii)
Any pending suit in any court, domestic or foreign, by United States nationals (including any suit with a judgment that is still subject to appeal or other forms of direct judicial review) coming within the terms of Article I shall be terminated.
(iii)
The Secretary of State shall provide for procedures governing applications by United States nationals with claims within the terms of Article I for compensation for those claims.
(iv)
The Attorney General shall enforce this subsection through all appropriate means, which may include seeking the dismissal, with prejudice, of any claim of a United States national within the terms of Article I pending or filed in any forum, domestic or foreign.
(b)
Claims of foreign nationals within the terms of Article I are settled according to the terms of the Claims Settlement Agreement.
(i)
No foreign national may assert or maintain any claim coming within the terms of Article I in any court in the United States.
(ii)
Any pending suit in any court in the United States by foreign nationals (including any suit with a judgment that is still subject to appeal or other forms of direct judicial review) coming within the terms of Article I shall be terminated.
(iii)
Neither the dismissal of the lawsuit, nor anything in this order, shall affect the ability of any foreign national to pursue other available remedies for claims coming within the terms of Article I in foreign courts or through the efforts of foreign governments.
(iv)
The Attorney General shall enforce this subsection through all appropriate means, which may include seeking the dismissal, with prejudice, of any claim of a foreign national within the terms of Article I pending or filed in any court in the United States.
Sec. 2. For purposes of this order:
(a)
The term “United States national” has the same meaning as “national of the United States” in section 101(a)(22) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(22)), but also includes any entity organized under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches).Start Printed Page 65966
(b)
The term “foreign national” means any person other than a United States national.
(c)
The term “person” means any individual or entity, including both natural and juridical persons.
(d)
The term “entity” means a partnership, association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization.
Sec. 3. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13478 of November 18, 2008
Amendments To Executive Order 9397 Relating To Federal Agency Use of Social Security Numbers
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. It is the policy of the United States that Federal agencies should conduct agency activities that involve personal identifiers in a manner consistent with protection of such identifiers against unlawful use.
Sec. 2.
Amendments to Executive Order 9397. Executive Order 9397 of November 22, 1943, is amended:
(a)
in paragraph 1 by:
(i)
striking “shall” and inserting in lieu thereof “may”;
(ii)
striking “exclusively”;
(iii) striking “Title 26, section 402.502” and inserting in lieu thereof “title 20, section 422.103”; and
(iv)
striking “the 1940 Supplement to”;
(b)
by striking “Bureau of the Budget” in paragraph 5 and inserting in lieu thereof “Office of Management and Budget”;
(c)
by renumbering paragraph 6 as paragraph 8;
(d)
by inserting immediately following paragraph 5 the following new paragraphs:
“6.
This order shall be implemented in accordance with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
“7.
This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against
the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.”; and
(e)
by striking “Board” each place it appears and inserting in lieu thereof in each such place “Administration”.
Start Printed Page 70240
Sec. 3. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13479 of November 18, 2008
Transformation of the National Air Transportation System
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy.
It is the policy of the United States to establish and maintain a national air transportation system that meets the present and future civil aviation, homeland security, economic, environmental protection, and national defense needs of the United States, including through effective implementation of the Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen).
Sec. 2.
Definitions.
As used in this order the term “Next Generation Air Transportation System” means the system to which section 709 of the Vision 100—Century of Aviation Reauthorization Act (Public Law 108-176) (Act) refers.
Sec. 3.
Functions of the Secretary of Transportation.
Consistent with sections 709 and 710 of the Act and the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the Secretary of Transportation shall:
(a)
take such action within the authority of the Secretary, and recommend as appropriate to the President such action as is within the authority of the President, to implement the policy set forth in section 1 of this order and in particular to implement the NextGen in a safe, secure, timely, environmentally sound, efficient, and effective manner;
(b)
convene quarterly, unless the Secretary determines that meeting less often is consistent with effective implementation of the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the Senior Policy Committee established pursuant to section 710 of the Act (Committee);
(c)
not later than 60 days after the date of this order, establish within the Department of Transportation a support staff (Staff), including employees from departments and agencies assigned pursuant to subsection 4(e) of this order, to support, as directed by the Secretary, the Secretary and the Committee in the performance of their duties relating to the policy set forth in section 1 of this order; and
(d)
not later than 180 days after the date of this order, establish an advisory committee to provide advice to the Secretary and, through the Secretary, the Committee concerning the implementation of the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, including aviation-related subjects and any related performance measures specified by the Secretary, pursuant to section 710 of the Act.
Sec. 4.
Functions of Other Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies.
Consistent with the policy set forth in section 1 of this order:
(a)
the Secretary of Defense shall assist the Secretary of Transportation by:
(i)
collaborating, as appropriate, and verifying that the NextGen meets the national defense needs of the United States consistent with the policies and plans established under applicable Presidential guidance; and
(ii)
furnishing, as appropriate, data streams to integrate national defense capabilities of the United States civil and military systems relating to the national air transportation system, and coordinating the development of requirements and capabilities to address tracking and Start Printed Page 70242other activities relating to non-cooperative aircraft in consultation with the Secretary of Homeland Security, as appropriate;
(b)
the Secretary of Commerce shall:
(i)
develop and make available, as appropriate, the capabilities of the Department of Commerce, including those relating to aviation weather and spectrum management, to support the NextGen; and
(ii)
take appropriate account of the needs of the NextGen in the trade, commerce, and other activities of the Department of Commerce, including those relating to the development and setting of standards;
(c)
the Secretary of Homeland Security shall assist the Secretary of Transportation by ensuring that:
(i)
the NextGen includes the aviation-related security capabilities necessary to ensure the security of persons, property, and activities within the national air transportation system consistent with the policies and plans established under applicable Presidential guidance; and
(ii)
the Department of Homeland Security shall continue to carry out all statutory and assigned responsibilities relating to aviation security, border security, and critical infrastructure protection in consultation with the Secretary of Defense, as appropriate;
(d)
the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration shall carry out the Administrator's duties under Executive Order 13419 of December 20, 2006, in a manner consistent with that order and the policy set forth in section 1 of this order;
(e)
the heads of executive departments and agencies shall provide to the Secretary of Transportation such information and assistance, including personnel and other resources for the Staff to which subsection 3(c) of this order refers, as may be necessary and appropriate to implement this order as agreed to by the heads of the departments and agencies involved; and
(f)
the Director of the Office of Management and Budget may issue such instructions as may be necessary to implement subsection 5(b) of this order.
Sec. 5.
Additional Functions of the Senior Policy Committee.
In addition to performing the functions specified in section 710 of the Act, the Committee shall:
(a)
report not less often than every 2 years to the President, through the Secretary of Transportation, on progress made and projected to implement the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, together with such recommendations including performance measures for administrative or other action as the Committee determines appropriate;
(b)
review the proposals by the heads of executive departments and agencies to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget with respect to programs affecting the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, and make recommendations including performance measures thereon, through the Secretary of Transportation, to the Director; and
(c)
advise the Secretary of Transportation and, through the Secretary of Transportation, the Secretaries of Defense, Commerce, and Homeland Security, and the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, with respect to the activities of their departments and agencies in the implementation of the policy set forth in section 1 of this order.
Sec. 6.
General Provisions.
(a)
Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(i)
authority granted by law to a department or agency, or the head thereof; or
(ii)
functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(b)
This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
Start Printed Page 70243
(c)
This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13480 of November 26, 2008
Exclusions From the Federal Labor-management Relations Program
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 7103(b)(1) of title 5, United States Code, and in order to reflect the effects of the reorganization and restructuring of the Departments of Energy, Homeland Security, Justice, Transportation, and the Treasury on their subdivisions exempted from coverage under the Federal Labor-Management Relations Program, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Determinations. The subdivisions of the Departments of Energy, Homeland Security, Justice, Transportation, and the Treasury set forth in sections 2 through 6 of this order are hereby determined to have as a primary function intelligence, counterintelligence, investigative, or national security work.
It is further determined that chapter 71 of title 5, United States Code, cannot be applied to these subdivisions in a manner consistent with national security requirements and considerations.
Sec. 2.
Department of Energy. Executive Order 12171 of November 19, 1979, as amended, is further amended by revising section 1-210 to read as follows:
“1-210.
Agencies or subdivisions of the Department of Energy:
(a)
The National Nuclear Security Administration.
(b)
The Office of Intelligence.
(c)
The Office of Counterintelligence.
(d)
The Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence.
(e)
The Savannah River Operations Office.”
Sec. 3.
Department of Homeland Security. Executive Order 12171 of November 19, 1979, as amended, is further amended by revising section 1-214 to read as follows:
“1-214.
Agencies or subdivisions of the Department of Homeland Security:
(a)
Office of the Military Advisor.
(b)
The following office within the Management Directorate:
(1)
Office of Security.
(c)
Office of Operations Coordination.
(d)
Office of Counternarcotics Enforcement.
(e)
Office of Intelligence and Analysis.
(f)
Domestic Nuclear Detection Office.
(g)
The following offices and subdivisions within the United States Coast Guard:
(1)
Maritime Intelligence Fusion Centers, Atlantic.
(2)
Pacific Area Intelligence Division.
(3)
Intelligence Coordination Center.
(4)
Coast Guard Investigative Service.
(5)
Coast Guard Security Center.Start Printed Page 73992
(h)
The following offices and subdivisions within United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement:
(1)
The Office of Investigations.
(2)
The Office of International Affairs.
(3)
The Office of Intelligence.
(4)
The National Incident Response Unit.
(i)
The following office within the Transportation Security Administration:
(1)
The Office of Law Enforcement/Federal Air Marshal Service.
(j)
The following office within United States Customs and Border Protection:
(1)
The Office of Intelligence and Operations Coordination.
(k)
The following offices and subdivisions within the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1)
The following offices and subdivisions within the Office of National Continuity Programs:
(A)
The Office of the Assistant Administrator.
(B)
The Operations Division.
(C)
The Continuity of Operations Division.
(D)
The Readiness Division.
(E)
The Integrated Public Alert and Warning Systems Division.
(2)
The following subdivisions within the Disaster Operations Directorate:
(A)
The Mobile Emergency Response Support Operations, including Mobile Emergency Response Support Detachments.
(B)
The FEMA Operations Center.
(C)
The Alternate FEMA Operations Center.“
Sec. 4.
Department of Justice. Executive Order 12171 of November 19, 1979, as amended, is further amended by:
(a)
revising subsection (g) of section 1-209 to read as follows:
“(g) National Security Division.”; and
(b)
adding to the end of section 1-209 the following new subsection:
“(h) Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives.”
Sec. 5.
Department of Transportation. Executive Order 12171 of November 19, 1979, as amended, is further amended by revising section 1-213 to read as follows:
“1-213.
The following subdivision of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Department of Transportation:
National Security Coordination Division, Office of Emergency Operations and Investigations, FAA Office of Security and Hazardous Materials.”
Sec. 6.
Department of the Treasury. Executive Order 12171 of November 19, 1979, as amended, is further amended by revising section 1-203 to read as follows:
“1-203.
Agencies or subdivisions of the Department of the Treasury:
(a)
The Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence.
(b)
The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network.
(c)
Criminal Investigation, Internal Revenue Service.
(d)
The Trade Analysis and Enforcement Division, Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau.“
Start Printed Page 73993
Sec. 7. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13481 of December 9, 2008
Providing An Order of Succession Within the Department of Justice
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, 5 U.S.C. 3345 et seq., it is hereby ordered that:
Section 1. Subject to the provisions of section 2 of this order, the following officers, in the order listed, shall act as and perform the functions and duties of the office of Attorney General, during any period in which the Attorney General, the Deputy Attorney General, the Associate Attorney General, and the officers designated by the Attorney General pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 508 to act as Attorney General have died, resigned, or otherwise become unable to perform the functions and duties of the office of Attorney General, until such time as at least one of the officers mentioned above is able to perform the functions and duties of that office:
(a)
United States Attorney for the District of Maryland;
(b)
United States Attorney for the Southern District of
Alabama; and
(c)
United States Attorney for the Northern District of
Georgia.
Sec. 2.
Exceptions.
(a)
No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 1 of this order in an acting capacity, by virtue of so serving, shall act as Attorney General pursuant to this order.
(b)
No individual listed in section 1 shall act as Attorney General unless that individual is otherwise eligible to so serve under the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998.
(c)
Notwithstanding the provisions of this order, the President retains discretion, to the extent permitted by law, to depart from this order in designating an acting Attorney General.
Sec. 3. This order supersedes the President's Memorandum for the Attorney General of December 8, 2006 (Designation of Officers of the Department of Justice).
Sec. 4. This order is intended to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
Start Printed Page 75532
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13482 of December 12, 2008
Closing of Executive Departments and Agencies of the Federal Government on Friday, December 26, 2008
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. All executive branch departments and agencies of the Federal Government shall be closed and their employees excused from duty on Friday, December 26, 2008, the day after Christmas Day, except as provided in section 2 of this order.
Sec. 2. The heads of executive branch departments and agencies may determine that certain offices and installations of their organizations, or parts thereof, must remain open and that certain employees must report for duty on December 26, 2008, for reasons of national security or defense or other public need.
Sec. 3. Friday, December 26, 2008, shall be considered as falling within the scope of Executive Order 11582 of February 11, 1971, and of 5 U.S.C. 5546 and 6103(b) and other similar statutes insofar as they relate to the pay and leave of employees of the United States.
Sec. 4. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13483 of December 18, 2008
Adjustments of Certain Rates of Pay
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the laws cited herein, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Statutory Pay Systems.
The rates of basic pay or salaries of the statutory pay systems (as defined in 5 U.S.C. 5302(1)), as adjusted under 5 U.S.C. 5303(a), are set forth on the schedules attached hereto and made a part hereof:
(a)
The General Schedule (5 U.S.C. 5332(a)) at Schedule 1;
(b)
The Foreign Service Schedule (22 U.S.C. 3963) at Schedule 2; and
(c)
The schedules for the Veterans Health Administration of the Department of Veterans Affairs (38 U.S.C. 7306, 7404; section 301(a) of Public Law 102-40) at Schedule 3.
Sec. 2.
Senior Executive Service.
The ranges of rates of basic pay for senior executives in the Senior Executive Service, as established pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 5382, are set forth on Schedule 4 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 3.
Certain Executive, Legislative, and Judicial Salaries.
The rates of basic pay or salaries for the following offices and positions are set forth on the schedules attached hereto and made a part hereof:
(a)
The Executive Schedule (5 U.S.C. 5312-5318) at Schedule 5;
(b)
The Vice President (3 U.S.C. 104) and the Congress (2 U.S.C. 31) at Schedule 6; and
(c)
Justices and judges (28 U.S.C. 5, 44(d), 135, 252, and 461(a), section 140 of Public Law 97-92, and section 305 of
Division D of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2008), at Schedule 7.
Sec. 4.
Uniformed Services.
The rates of monthly basic pay (37 U.S.C. 203(a)) for members of the uniformed services, as adjusted under 37 U.S.C. 1009, and section 601 of the Duncan Hunter National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2009 (Public Law 110-417, October 14, 2008), and the rate of monthly cadet or midshipman pay (37 U.S.C. 203(c)) are set forth on Schedule 8 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 5.
Locality-Based Comparability Payments.
(a)
Pursuant to section 5304 of title 5, United States Code, and section 142 of the Consolidated Security, Disaster Assistance, and Continuing Appropriations Act, 2009 (Public Law 110-329, September 30, 2008), locality-based comparability payments shall be paid in accordance with Schedule 9 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
(b)
The Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall take such actions as may be necessary to implement these payments and to publish appropriate notice of such payments in the Federal Register.
Sec. 6.
Administrative Law Judges.
The rates of basic pay for administrative law judges, as adjusted under 5 U.S.C. 5372(b)(4), are set forth on Schedule 10 attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Sec. 7.
Effective Dates.
Schedule 8 is effective January 1, 2009.
The other schedules contained herein are effective on the first day of the first applicable pay period beginning on or after January 1, 2009.Start Printed Page 78588
Sec. 8.
Prior Order Superseded.
Executive Order 13454 of January 4, 2008, is superseded.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
December 18, 2008.
Start Printed Page 78589
Start Printed Page 78590
Start Printed Page 78591
Start Printed Page 78592
Start Printed Page 78593
Start Printed Page 78594
Start Printed Page 78595
Start Printed Page 78596
Start Printed Page 78597
Start Printed Page 78598
Executive Order 13484 of January 9, 2009
Amending the Order of Succession
Within the Department of Agriculture
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, 5 U.S.C. 3345 et seq., it is hereby ordered that Executive Order 13241 of December 18, 2001, as amended, is further amended as follows:
Section 1. Section 2 is amended to read as follows:
“Sec. 2.
Order of Succession.
“(a)
General Counsel of the Department of Agriculture;
“(b)
Chief Financial Officer of the Department of
Agriculture;
“(c)
Assistant Secretary of Agriculture for
Administration;
“(d)
Under Secretary of Agriculture for Farm and
Foreign Agricultural Services;
“(e)
Under Secretary of Agriculture for Natural
Resources and Environment;
“(f)
Under Secretary of Agriculture for Marketing and
Regulatory Programs;
“(g)
Under Secretary of Agriculture for Rural
Development;
“(h)
Under Secretary of Agriculture for Food,
Nutrition, and Consumer Services;
“(i)
Under Secretary of Agriculture for Food Safety;
“(j)
Under Secretary of Agriculture for Research,
Education, and Economics;
“(k)
Assistant Secretary of Agriculture for
Congressional Relations;
“(l)
Assistant Secretary of Agriculture for Civil
Rights;
“(m)
Director, Kansas City Commodity Office, Farm
Service Agency (consistent with the time of service and rate
of pay requirements of section 3345(a)(3) of title 5,
United States Code); and
“(n)
State Executive Directors of the Farm Service
Agency for the States of Missouri, Kansas, Iowa, and
Nebraska, in order of seniority fixed by length of unbroken
service as State Executive Director of that State (consistent
with the time of service and rate of pay requirements of
section 3345(a)(3) of title 5, United States Code).”.
Sec. 2. Section 3(a) is amended by striking “2(a)-(j)” and inserting “2(a)-(n)”, and a new section 3(c) is added to read as follows:
“(c)
No individual listed in section 2 shall act as the Secretary unless that individual is otherwise eligible to so
serve under the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998.”
Start Printed Page 2286
Sec. 3. This order is intended to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13485 of January 9, 2009
Providing an Order of Succession Within the Department of Transportation
By the authority vested in me as President under the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, 5 U.S.C. 3345 et seq., it is hereby ordered that:
Section 1.
Order of Succession.
Subject to the provisions of section 2 of this order, the following officials of the Department of Transportation, in the order listed, shall act as and perform the functions and duties of the office of the Secretary of Transportation (Secretary), during any period in which the Secretary, the Deputy Secretary of Transportation, the Under Secretary of Transportation for Policy, and the officials designated by the Secretary pursuant to 49 U.S.C. 102(e) have died, resigned, or otherwise become unable to perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary, until such time as the Secretary or one of the officials listed above is able to perform the duties of that office:
(a)
Administrator of the Federal Highway Administration;
(b)
Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration;
(c)
Administrator of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration;
(d)
Administrator of the Federal Railroad Administration;
(e)
Administrator of the Federal Transit Administration;
(f)
Administrator of the Maritime Administration;
(g)
Administrator of the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration;
(h)
Administrator of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration;
(i)
Administrator of the Research and Innovative Technology Administration;
(j)
Administrator of the Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation;
(k)
Regional Administrator, Southern Region, Federal Aviation Administration;
(l)
Director, Resource Center, Lakewood, Colorado, Federal Highway Administration; and
(m)
Regional Administrator, Northwest Mountain Region, Federal Aviation Administration.
Sec. 2.
Exceptions.
(a)
No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 1 in an acting capacity, by virtue of so serving, shall act as Secretary pursuant to this section.
(b)
No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 1 shall act as Secretary unless that individual is otherwise eligible to so serve under the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998.
(c)
Notwithstanding the provisions of this order, the President retains discretion, to the extent permitted by law, to depart from this order in designating an acting Secretary.
Sec. 3. This order supersedes the President's Memorandum of March 19, 2002 (Designation of Officers of the Department of Transportation).Start Printed Page 2288
Sec. 4. This order is intended to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Executive Order 13486 of January 9, 2009
Strengthening Laboratory Biosecurity in the United States
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy.
It is the policy of the United States that facilities that possess biological select agents and toxins have appropriate security and personnel assurance practices to protect against theft, misuse, or diversion to unlawful activity of such agents and toxins.
Sec. 2.
Establishment and Operation of the Working Group.
(a)
There is hereby established, within the Department of Defense for administrative purposes only, the Working Group on Strengthening the Biosecurity of the United States (Working Group).
(b)
The Working Group shall consist exclusively of the following members:
(i)
the Secretary of State;
(ii)
the Secretary of Defense, who shall be a Co-Chair of the Working Group;
(iii)
the Attorney General;
(iv)
the Secretary of Agriculture;
(v)
the Secretary of Commerce;
(vi)
the Secretary of Health and Human Services, who shall be a Co-Chair of the Working Group;
(vii)
the Secretary of Transportation;
(viii)
the Secretary of Energy;
(ix)
the Secretary of Homeland Security;
(x)
the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency;
(xi)
the Director of National Intelligence;
(xii)
the Director of the National Science Foundation; and
(xiii)
the head of any other department or agency when designated:
(A)
by the Co-Chairs of the Working Group with the concurrence of such head; or
(B)
by the President.
(c)
The Co-Chairs shall convene and preside at meetings of the Working Group, determine its agenda, and direct its work.
The Co-Chairs may establish and direct subgroups of the Working Group, as appropriate to deal with particular subject matters, that shall consist exclusively of members of the Working Group.
(d)
A member of the Working Group may designate, to perform the Working Group or Working Group subgroup functions of the member, any person who is a part of the member's agency and who is an officer of the United States appointed by the President, a member of the Senior Executive Service (SES), or the equivalent of a member of the SES.
Sec. 3.
Functions of the Working Group.
Consistent with this order, and to assist in implementing the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, the Working Group shall:
(a)
review and evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness, with respect to Federal and nonfederal facilities that conduct research on, manage clinical Start Printed Page 2290or environmental laboratory operations involving, or handle, store, or transport biological select agents and toxins, of the following:
(i)
existing laws, regulations, and guidance with respect to physical, facility, and personnel security and assurance; and
(ii)
practices with respect to physical, facility, and personnel security and assurance;
(b)
obtain information or advice, as appropriate for the conduct of the review and evaluation, from the following:
(i)
heads of executive departments and agencies;
(ii)
elements of foreign governments and international organizations with responsibility for biological matters, consistent with functions assigned by law or by the President to the Secretary of State; and
(iii)
representatives of State, local, territorial, and tribal governments, and other entities or other individuals in a manner that seeks their individual advice and does not involve collective judgment or consensus advice or deliberation; and
(c)
submit a report to the President, through the Co-Chairs, not later than 180 days after the date of this order that is unclassified, with a classified annex as required, and sets forth the following:
(i)
a summary of existing laws, regulations, guidance, and practices with respect to security and personnel assurance reviewed under subsection (a) of this section and their efficiency and effectiveness;
(ii)
recommendations for any new legislation, regulations, guidance, or practices for security and personnel assurance for all Federal and nonfederal facilities described in subsection (a);
(iii)
options for establishing oversight mechanisms to ensure a baseline standard is consistently applied for all physical, facility, and personnel security and assurance laws, regulations, and guidance at all Federal and nonfederal facilities described in subsection (a); and
(iv)
a comparison of the range of existing personnel security and assurance programs for access to biological select agents and toxins to personnel security and assurance programs in other fields and industries.
Sec. 4.
Duties of Heads of Departments and Agencies.
(a)
The heads of departments and agencies shall provide for the labor and travel costs of their representatives and, to the extent permitted by law, provide the Working Group such information and assistance as it needs to implement this order.
(b)
To the extent permitted by law and subject to the availability of appropriations, the Secretary of Defense shall provide the Working Group with such administrative and support services as may be necessary for the performance of its functions.
Sec. 5.
Termination of the Working Group.
The Working Group shall terminate 60 days after the date of the report submitted under subsection 3(c) of this order.
Sec. 6.
General Provisions.
(a)
Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(i)
authority granted by law to a department or agency, or the head thereof; or
(ii)
functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(b)
This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
Start Printed Page 2291
(c)
This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 4097
Executive Order 13487 of
January 16, 2009
Establishment of a Temporary Organization To Facilitate United States Government Support for Afghanistan
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 202 of the Revised Statutes (22 U.S.C. 2656) and section 3161 of title 5, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Establishment. There is established within the Department of State, in accordance with section 3161 of title 5, United States Code, a temporary organization to be known as the Afghanistan Support Office (ASO).
Sec. 2.
Purpose of the Temporary Organization. The purpose of the ASO shall be to perform the specific project of supporting executive departments and agencies in preventing Afghanistan from becoming a safe haven for terrorists, facilitating Afghanistan's progress to self-sufficiency, and maintaining an effective diplomatic presence in Afghanistan.
Sec. 3.
Functions of the Temporary Organization. In carrying out its purpose set forth in section 2, the ASO shall:
(a)
support executive departments and agencies in building the civilian capabilities of the Government of Afghanistan, including expansion of central services by the Government of Afghanistan, development of a thriving private sector economy, and improvement in the governance of Afghanistan's territory and borders; and
(b)
perform such other functions related to the specific project set forth in section 2 as the Secretary of State (Secretary) may assign.
Sec. 4.
Personnel and Administration.
The ASO shall be headed by a Director selected by the Secretary.
The ASO shall be jointly based in Washington, D.C., and Afghanistan, and the Secretary of State shall seek accreditation of employees as members of the United States Embassy Kabul as necessary.
Sec. 5.
General Provisions.
(a)
This order shall be implemented in accordance with applicable law, subject to the availability of appropriations, and consistent with presidential guidance.
(b)
This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party against the United States, its agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
Start Printed Page 4098
(c)
The ASO shall terminate at the end of the maximum period permitted by section 3161(a)(1) of title 5, United States Code, unless sooner terminated by the Secretary.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Start Printed Page 4111
Executive Order 13488 of January 16, 2009
Granting Reciprocity on Excepted Service and Federal Contractor Employee Fitness and Reinvestigating Individuals in Positions of Public Trust
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including sections 1104(a)(1), 3301, and 7301 of title 5, United States Code, and in order to simplify and streamline the system of Federal Government personnel investigative and adjudicative processes to make them more efficient and effective, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1.
Policy. (a) When agencies determine the fitness of individuals to perform work as employees in the excepted service or as contractor employees, prior favorable fitness or suitability determinations should be granted reciprocal recognition, to the extent practicable.
(b) It is necessary to reinvestigate individuals in positions of public trust in order to ensure that they remain suitable for continued employment.
Sec. 2.
Definitions. For the purposes of this order:
(a) “Agency” means an executive agency as defined in section 105 of title 5, United States Code, but does not include the Government Accountability Office.
(b) “Contractor employee” means an individual who performs work for or on behalf of any agency under a contract and who, in order to perform the work specified under the contract, will require access to space, information, information technology systems, staff, or other assets of the Federal Government. Such contracts, include, but are not limited to:
(i) personal services contracts;
(ii) contracts between any non-Federal entity and any agency; and
(iii) sub-contracts between any non-Federal entity and another non-Federal entity to perform work related to the primary contract with the agency.
(c) “Excepted service” has the meaning provided in section 2103 of title 5, United States Code, but does not include those positions in any element of the intelligence community as defined in the National Security Act of 1947, as amended, to the extent they are not otherwise subject to Office of Personnel Management appointing authorities.
(d) “Fitness” is the level of character and conduct determined necessary for an individual to perform work for or on behalf of a Federal agency as an employee in the excepted service (other than a position subject to suitability) or as a contractor employee.
(e) “Fitness determination” means a decision by an agency that an individual has or does not have the required level of character and conduct necessary to perform work for or on behalf of a Federal agency as an employee in the excepted service (other than a position subject to suitability) or as a contractor employee. A favorable fitness determination is not a decision to appoint or contract with an individual.
(f) “Position of Public Trust” has the meaning provided in 5 CFR Part 731.
(g) “Suitability” has the meaning and coverage provided in CFR Part 731.Start Printed Page 4112
Sec. 3.
Agency Authority to Set Fitness Criteria and Determine Equivalency. The authority to establish criteria for making fitness determinations remains within the discretion of the agency head. Agency heads also have the discretion to determine whether their criteria are equivalent to suitability standards established by the Office of Personnel Management. Agency heads shall take into account Office of Personnel Management guidance when exercising this discretion.
Sec. 4.
Reciprocal Recognition of Fitness and Suitability Determinations. (a) Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, agencies making fitness determinations shall grant reciprocal recognition to a prior favorable fitness or suitability determination when:
(i) the gaining agency uses criteria for making fitness determinations equivalent to suitability standards established by the Office of Personnel Management;
(ii) the prior favorable fitness or suitability determination was based on criteria equivalent to suitability standards established by the Office of Personnel Management; and
(iii) the individual has had no break in employment since the favorable determination was made.
(b) Exceptions to Reciprocal Recognition. A gaining agency is not required to grant reciprocal recognition to a prior favorable fitness or suitability determination when:
(i) the new position requires a higher level of investigation than previously conducted for that individual;
(ii) an agency obtains new information that calls into question the individual's fitness based on character or conduct; or
(iii) the individual's investigative record shows conduct that is incompatible with the core duties of the new position.
Sec. 5.
Reinvestigation of Individuals in Positions of Public Trust. Individuals in positions of public trust shall be subject to reinvestigation under standards (including but not limited to the frequency of such reinvestigation) as determined by the Director of the Office of Personnel Management, to ensure their suitability for continued employment.
Sec. 6.
Responsibilities. (a) An agency shall report to the Office of Personnel Management the nature and results of the background investigation and fitness determination (or later changes to that determination) made on an individual, to the extent consistent with law.
(b) The Director of the Office of Personnel Management is delegated authority to implement this order, including the authority to issue regulations and guidance governing suitability, or guidance related to fitness, as the Director determines appropriate.
Sec. 7.
General Provisions.
(a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(i) authority granted by law to a department or agency, or the head thereof; or
(ii) functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(b) This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(c) This order shall not suspend, impede, or otherwise affect Executive Order 10450 of April 27, 1953, as amended, or Executive Order 13467 of June 30, 2008;
(d) This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its agencies, instrumentalities, or entities, its officers, employees or agents, or any other person.Start Printed Page 4113
Sec. 8.
Effective Date and Applicability. This order is effective upon issuance and is applicable to individuals newly appointed to excepted service positions or hired as contractor employees beginning 90 days from the effective date of this order.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
